Title: If Agents Were Angels, No Governance Would Be Necessary: Out-of-Band Policy Enforcement at a Trusted Tool Boundary

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.27646v1

Published Time: Mon, 31 Aug 2026 00:10:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# If Agents Were Angels, No Governance Would Be Necessary: Out-of-Band Policy Enforcement at a Trusted Tool Boundary 

## Marc Millstone Tyler Akidau 

## marc@redpanda.com takidau@redpanda.com 

## Johannes Brüderl Marat Pekker 

## johannes@redpanda.com marat.pekker@redpanda.com 

## Redpanda Data 

## Abstract 

Give an agent a human’s credential and it inherits the person’s reach, but not the way a person normally exercises it. A hu-man opens a record through an interface and chooses what to carry elsewhere. An agent can sweep every reachable record and pour returned text directly into model context, where an instruction hidden in the data can steer its next call. Every request can remain credential-valid while the agent violates its job or absorbs a secret it should never see. An otherwise allowed call may also need to pause when its arguments or external state trigger a business rule. Prompts are a brittle last guardrail because they ask the same fallible reasoner to interpret the task and enforce its own limits. We present Out-of-Band Policy Enforcement (OBPE), a trusted tool boundary outside agent reasoning. It mediates the whole exchange, authorizing the typed operation and resource, narrowing a query or shaping arguments before the backend call, then filtering records and fields, redacting matching con-tent, or masking values in the response. Semantic gating con-siders argument values or external state, so an authorized call can still be denied or held for an external decision. A data pol-icy owner sets the maximum grant, and agent policy can only narrow it. We formalize this staged composition and prove, under stated conditions, that its policy plan is unaffected by match order, while agent-specific policy cannot widen the owner’s ceiling. Field removal guarantees only that one value is absent from one execution; masking and event-history rules carry narrower claims. We release a simplified HTTP proxy prototype based on our production OBPE implementation. It uses Cedar, a typed authorization language, with conformance tests tying code to model. Against controlled Jira and ServiceNow mocks, the benchmark compares prompted agents with and without the evaluated OBPE bundle across four models, including 20 response-adaptive red-team tasks. A deterministic trace failure means that protected data entered agent context, an exact protected value appeared in the answer, or a forbidden backend effect completed. In 3,621 trials, its observed rate in the primary contrast fell from 57.6% to 0.2%; the equally cluster-weighted reduction was 41.2 points [95% confidence interval: 27.7, 54.9]. Unweighted standalone fulfillment fell from 79.1% to 60.9%. In the paired, cluster-weighted analysis, safe-useful completion rose by 21.8 points [9.5, 35.2] under the primary judge and 19.1 points under a second. Safe-useful credits fulfilled allowed work that follows the archived tool contract and avoids both trace failure and judged disclosure of a protected fact, even without its exact value. Four final answers nevertheless reconstructed an exact value that never entered agent context, and a separate trial used filtered row counts as an oracle. These failures mark the line between shaping one execution and proving noninterference. Produc-tion write controls, durable human approval, and temporal and aggregate policies fall outside this evaluation. 

## 1 Introduction 

If agents were angels, no governance would be necessary [27]. Credentials constrain access, but they do not carry a worker’s judgment into an autonomous loop. An agent need not be malicious, or even disobedient, to exceed the job it was given. A tool-using large language model (LLM) agent can chain retrieval and action under borrowed authority. Returned data becomes part of its reasoning state, and that state helps choose the next call. The credential supplies reach while the judgment that normally limits its use remains outside the protocol. Consider an agent asked to summarize issues from one engineering project. Its service credential can read many. OAuth scopes can narrow an access token [21]; Rich Au-thorization Requests can carry finer authorization details, and token exchange can issue a downstream token for a particular resource [25, 26]. These mechanisms help when the autho-rization service knows the assignment and every backend can honor the result. The credential actually supplied to an agent may still cover far more. To the backend, two project reads are valid; to the organization, only one belongs to the job. The agent has inherited a wrong-sized envelope: the credential says what is reachable, not what belongs to this assignment. OBPE narrows that envelope at the exchange itself, down to 1arXiv:2608.27646v1 [cs.AI] 27 Aug 2026 operations, resources, records, and fields. Even the right issue can be unsafe to return intact. Its de-scription may contain a secret, or text crafted to behave as an instruction once it enters model context. Indirect prompt injection exploits exactly this collapse between data and in-struction [20]. Denying the whole record protects the secret but may also destroy the useful answer. The boundary in-stead needs exposure control : a way to restrict what reaches the agent and what agent-authored values may return, while preserving the safe part of a permitted exchange. Some calls pass both tests and still should not proceed au-tomatically. A deployment can be within the agent’s role and reveal no protected data, yet require approval after hours. A series of individually acceptable actions can cross a cumula-tive limit. These are semantic gating decisions. They depend on argument values or external state, and their result may be to proceed, deny, or wait for a decision made outside the agent. 

Why the model should not be the policy authority. Aprompt asks the same reasoner that interprets untrusted data to enforce its own limits, so a successful injection can alter the expected guard. Tool-call evaluations likewise find that text refusal does not reliably predict whether an agent will take the forbidden action [10]. Formal limits make narrower, model-specific points: Hasan couples compliance to high Kol-mogorov complexity in a fixed sound theory, while Vassilev studies semantic prompt classification over an adversarial-input model [22, 37]. Neither says that a particular attack is undetectable or that a bounded typed policy decision is un-decidable. Model defenses can help, but should not carry the authoritative guarantee. Backend authorization is authorita-tive but answers what the credential may do, not what this agent should do for this task. The missing control point is the exchange, before a proposed operation or its response escapes policy. 

OBPE design. Out-of-Band Policy Enforcement (OBPE) places that control point between the agent’s tool client and the backend. A connector maps each call into typed prin-cipals, actions, resources, records, and fields. The boundary sees the proposed call before it can cause an effect and the complete response before it can enter model context. It can return a narrower exchange than the backend credential per-mits, or no exchange at all. Under our assumptions, the agent cannot choose its policy, spoof its bound identity, or bypass enforcement. The design also decides who gets the last word. A data pol-icy owner , the party responsible for the data source, writes an 

owner policy that establishes the maximum grant. A separate 

agent policy narrows that grant for one registered agent. Only the owner tier can create permit eligibility. An agent builder can make an agent less capable, but cannot use the agent tier to recover authority the owner policy withheld. The guarantee depends on trusted identity binding and on the owner policy accurately stating the intended ceiling. 

Contributions. This paper makes four evidence-separated contributions. First, it explains why agent delegation requires authorization, exposure control, and semantic gating at the tool exchange rather than in model reasoning alone. Sec-ond, it presents a typed enforcement pipeline and a two-tier policy model in which a data policy owner supplies the ceil-ing and agent policy can only narrow it. Third, it gives an order-independent, monotone composition law with explicit assumptions and limited guarantees for masking and history-dependent rules. Finally, it connects the model to a released HTTP enforcement path through conformance and a cross-model evaluation that measures forbidden exposure and ef-fects alongside useful completion. 

Composition and guarantees. Gating and shaping opera-tors act at different stages, and an accidental order can change what reaches the backend or the model. We define a staged composition that chooses the most restrictive applicable result within each stage. Under stated conditions, the policy plan is independent of match order, and a well-formed agent re-striction cannot enlarge the owner-only plan. We prove both properties in the model and test the released path for confor-mance. The guarantees stop where their evidence stops. Removing a field can establish that the selected value was absent from one execution. It does not prove that protected information influenced no other observable behavior. Pattern masking over free text is best effort, while policies over time or event counts require a trustworthy ordered history. We state these boundaries beside the corresponding claims instead of treating every transformation as information-flow noninterference. 

System and evidence boundary. We release an HTTP reference implementation of the OBPE contract. Controlled connectors and mocks replace live services and Model Con-text Protocol (MCP) transport so policy selection, shaping, and backend effects remain observable. Cedar, a typed au-thorization language, supplies an analyzable permit-or-forbid core [12]; OBPE annotations specify the surrounding gates and transformations. The private production system supplied requirements for remote identity, durable approval, broader schemas, and history policy. Every empirical claim rests on the released implementation, its conformance suite, and con-trolled backends. 

Evaluation contract. We separate what the model proves, what conformance establishes about code, what the bench-mark observes, and what we know only from production de-sign. The benchmark uses the same frozen tasks across treat-ment arms and models, then subjects them to matched red-team pressure. Exact exposure, policy decisions, and backend effects come from deterministic traces. LLM judges assess semantic disclosure and useful completion separately; they do not override those traces. Across 3,621 trials, the trace-failure rate in the primary prompted-agent cells falls from 57.6% without OBPE to 0.2% with it, while safe-useful completion improves under OBPE across all four agent models. Section 8 gives the paired estimates and the failure cases that bound 2them. 

## 2 Threat Model and Security Goals 

We treat the agent as untrusted: it may propose any call and arguments it can express, whether because of an attack, model failure, or ordinary task pursuit. The guarantees do not depend on telling those causes apart. Even a cooperative agent can wander beyond its assignment because the credential allows it, carry a sensitive value from one tool to another, or execute a consequential call that looked locally reasonable. At that point, borrowed authority exceeds the job. 

Adversary. An attacker may control the task given to the agent or influence text returned by a permitted read. It can in-teract repeatedly and use direct requests, instruction injection, encoding, or multi-step reconstruction. Its goals are to recover protected data, cause an unauthorized backend effect, escape the agent-policy restriction, or cross a tenant boundary. The attacker cannot modify policy state, spoof the platform-bound agent identity, or bypass the mediated tool path. An attacker is not required for information to escape. A read tool can place a secret in model context, after which an ordinary send or post carries it to a sink. Private data access, untrusted content, and external communication form the “lethal trifecta” [38]; an agent with all three can cause harm while following its task. The policy must therefore remove or gate a leg of that path instead of relying on the model to recognize malicious intent. 

Security goals. Authority begins with the owner policy, which bounds what the backend credential may expose or change. Agent policy may narrow that result but never widen it. Within the supported path, the boundary filters prohibited records, keeps structurally removed or fully redacted values out of model context for that execution, and prevents forbid-den backend effects. Pattern masking carries only a best-effort claim. A gated call introduces a second obligation. It must wait on a trusted channel that the agent cannot read or forge, and only an authorized approver may resolve it. A system that later resumes the work must bind approval to every policy-relevant part of the durable held request. Approval releases that request under the owner ceiling; it cannot rewrite the call, reverse an owner denial, or grant either party direct backend access. Identity, policy-loading, or evaluation failure closes the path. These goals cover the mediated exchange, not information the model learned elsewhere. 

Trusted boundary. We trust the platform, proxy, connec-tor, data policy owner, and backend execution. The trusted platform binds the registered agent’s identity to each tool call outside agent-controlled arguments. The proxy uses that identity to select the applicable agent policy; otherwise an agent could shed its narrower bundle and rise to the owner-policy ceiling. The connector must map the complete request and response into the typed objects the policy expects. Every relevant call must traverse the proxy under complete media-tion [33], and the backend must execute the mediated request according to that model. We treat the model, its prompt, tool-returned text, and agent-authored arguments as untrusted. Trust in the data policy owner has a precise limit. Given a Cedar type schema that faithfully represents a frozen connec-tor mapping, Cedar Analysis can check the permit-or-forbid core for conflicts, ineffective rules, or complete denials [19]. The released YAML mapping is not such a schema, and the artifact does not run this analysis. In any case, those checks cover neither OBPE shaping nor organizational intent. OBPE enforces the written ceiling and makes its impact inspectable; a human remains responsible for choosing the right one. Out of scope are timing and cache side channels, compro-mise of the trusted platform or proxy, malicious policy authors, supply-chain attacks, policy inference by probing, and paths that bypass mediation. Inference from allowed query results is different: it is an in-scope residual risk. We measure one count oracle but do not claim to close that channel. In a multi-agent chain, OBPE governs a downstream call only when the platform binds the identity of the agent making it. The boundary does not secure agent-to-agent messages or reconstruct context the platform discarded, and it makes no general noninterference claim beyond the scoped absence guarantees in the model. 

## 3 Architecture and Enforcement Path 

A tool exchange crosses the boundary twice, first as an agent’s proposed call and again as the backend response. OBPE can stop a scoped forbidden effect before dispatch and shape pro-tected data before it enters model context, but only if neither path can route around policy. Under the assumptions of §2, every relevant call reaches the backend through the boundary and every complete response returns through it (Figure 1). Hiding a tool from discovery is insufficient because a tool that remains callable still needs enforcement on its execution path. OBPE first uses the platform-bound identity from §2 to select the applicable agent policy. Because that identity arrives outside agent-controlled arguments, the call cannot choose its own policy. A connector then translates the tool exchange into the typed objects policy understands: principal, action, resource, records, and fields. This is where generic tool traffic acquires meaning such as “update this issue” or “return these customer records.” If the mapping omits a callable surface or a policy-relevant field, that path falls outside the model and must be denied or governed separately. The backend credential stays behind the boundary. For each call, the owner policy creates permit eligibility and sets the maximum grant; agent policy can only remove from it. The gate resolves before any backend effect. A denial stops there, while a deferral holds a snapshot without dispatch and expires to denial if no trusted decision arrives. A permit 3LLM Agent  

> (untrusted reasoning)
> OBPE Gateway
> Owner policy (data policy owner) Agent policy (restriction) ▶
> gate / shape stages
> Backend
> request shaped response response
> Out-of-band approval channel defer approve / deny Audit log every decision

Figure 1: OBPE mediates a complete tool exchange. The tier-aware composition gives the owner policy permit authority and lets agent policy narrow it. Request shaping and gating run before dispatch; response shaping runs before data enters model context. A deferred call waits outside the agent’s reach, and the boundary emits an audit record with its decision. proceeds through request shaping, which can narrow a query, cap results, or change typed write arguments. On the return path, row filtering sees the complete records before field and content shaping; envelope sanitation runs last, and only that result reaches the agent. Each stage therefore receives the output of the one before it. We compare OBPE with other enforcement approaches along six properties adapted from prior out-of-band channel criteria [1]. Agent-inaccessible means the agent cannot di-rectly read, modify, select, forge, or bypass policy state on the covered path. It does not mean that no observable result can reveal anything about policy. Deterministic means the same typed call, policies, schema, and trusted state yield the same policy plan; backend behavior is outside that claim. The remaining four describe what enforcement understands and does. Resource-aware enforcement maps a call to its typed operation and resource, including the fields that policy governs, instead of relying only on a tool name. Boundary-shaping can narrow a typed request before dispatch. On the return path, it can filter records and fields, then redact or mask content before the response reaches the agent. External gating 

can hold an otherwise permitted call until an external decision arrives. Interoperability means the design can cover another agent or backend when the platform preserves identity binding and complete mediation through a trusted connector that maps the exchange into the typed model. The released prototype is a simplified HTTP proxy between an in-process tool caller and controlled mock backends. Its optional local Agent2Agent (A2A) path supports agents writ-ten in other languages, but it is not part of this evaluation. The artifact’s evidence covers complete requests and responses on supported HTTP paths through the released connectors. Streamed responses and other MCP surfaces, including re-source, prompt, and sampling requests, require separate me-diation and remain outside the evaluation. Production places OBPE at the MCP layer and supports remote A2A agents. We describe that deployment only to explain how the design is used; no production trace or result supports the paper’s claims. The architecture depends on preserving the mediated exchange, not on MCP. OBPE stops at the typed exchange. It can keep a returned value out of model context and constrain typed arguments before a tool runs, but it cannot police the agent’s final prose or recover hidden meaning from arbitrary free text. The eval-uation reports those failures separately. The connector contract extends beyond records and fields to the response envelope. An agent sees only an opaque fail-ure for denial and a pending status for deferral, never policy names or internal reasons. Counts, cursors, errors, ranking, and timing can still carry information, so a connector must either shape those surfaces safely, deny the call, or document the residual channel. 

## 4 Policy Model 

A policy decision at this boundary must answer more than yes or no. It can also change what the backend receives and what the agent sees. We represent that decision as a policy plan: a gate result, a shaped request, and the instructions applied to the backend response. Each call is evaluated against an owner policy S , the connec-tor’s data-source bundle, and, when one is registered, an agent policy P A selected using the platform-bound identity. Only the owner policy can make the call eligible to proceed. Agent policy may narrow that grant, while the backend credential C

sets an outer limit on what can execute. The gate applies those policies to the typed call context 

κ = ( A, a, o, x, h), which records the bound agent A, action a,resource o, complete arguments x, and trusted external state 

h available at evaluation. Figure 2 traces how the context becomes a policy plan: S and PA determine the gate, while C

constrains any backend call the gate permits. For a Jira listing, for example, a is list , o is the issue col-lection, and x holds the requested filter and cap. The resulting plan records the enforced query and the fields that may return. Policy evaluation first selects the rules whose principal, action, resource, and conditions match that context. We write the two resulting sets as 

DS = Match (S, κ), DA = Match (PA, κ).

DS contains the matching owner rules; DA contains those from the selected agent policy. Without a registered agent 4policy, DA is empty and adds no restriction. We keep the sets separate because only DS can establish permit eligibility. We use one standard term from order theory throughout the pipeline. For an ordered component, write x ⪯r y when every policy-controlled exchange admitted by x is also admitted by 

y. A meet is the greatest lower bound: it preserves all operands’ restrictions without adding an unrelated one. Gate outcomes, query predicates, caps, and finite allowlists have such meets. Thus GateMeet combines the matched gate contributions, and an empty DA adds no restriction. Free-text rewrites do not generally have this order; overlapping masks use a canonical normalizer instead of a meet. We name each result where it appears in the pipeline. The gate computes 

g = GateMeet (κ; DS, DA) ∈ { deny , defer , permit }.

It combines the gate contributions of DS and DA over their shared context κ. A call begins denied. Matching owner rules may establish permit eligibility, after which either tier may tighten the result to defer or deny. A defer is only the gate’s initial result. The released transition logic records whether its partial snapshot may resume or must be denied; it neither reruns policy nor dispatches the call. Credential C remains outside this function and limits the later backend call, so a policy permit cannot exceed the credential’s reach. Unless the gate denies the call, the boundary computes a shaped request 

ρ = ( q′, n′, w′).

Here q′ is the enforced read query, n′ is the record limit, and 

w′ is the map of typed write arguments. The limit is the largest number of records the boundary will return after combining the caller’s request with every policy cap. A post-fetch check enforces it even if the backend ignores the requested limit. A permit sends ρ to the backend. In the formal model, a defer holds ρ and every other policy-relevant part of the call while sending nothing. The release stores only the subset described below, so it exercises defer initiation and no-dispatch rather than safe resumption. For a permit, the response part of the policy plan is 

η = ( φR, F′, μ).

Here φS and φA are the owner- and agent-tier Cedar decisions for filter_record ; permits within one tier retain Cedar’s OR semantics. The keeper is φR(r) = φS(r) ∧ φA(r), with 

φA = true when no agent policy is registered. F′ contains the retained policy-controlled fields and μ their content oper-ations. A connector may retain a structural identifier I only when its schema declares that identifier non-sensitive and the owner policy, plus the selected agent policy when present, approves it for every surviving record. Because I is then fixed across the plans being compared, it lies outside the variable capability order; it is not outside the exposure boundary. If 

BC(ρ) is the raw response under credential C, the agent re-ceives 

EA = Sanitize (Encode (μ(Project F′∪I (Filter φR (BC(ρ)))))) .

A read has no write map, while a write need not return records. Let ⊥nr mean that a stage does not run. The complete policy plan is Π = ( g, ρ, η): deny uses (deny , ⊥nr , ⊥nr ), defer uses 

(defer , ρ, ⊥nr ), and permit uses (permit , ρ, η).OBPE evaluates Cedar rules over the typed principal, ac-tion, and resource. Cedar supplies the permit-or-forbid core. Annotations name the shaping or gating operator and its pa-rameters, such as a field group, cap, approver, or timeout. One policy may carry rules for authorization, exposure control, and semantic gating; composition acts on the plan tuple rather than collapsing those rules to a Boolean decision. Any ap-plicable forbid stops the call. On allow, the wrapper gathers annotations from every applicable permit policy rather than only the policy chosen as the display label. 

Plan and execution reach. Let T (X) denote the set of typed, policy-controlled exchange traces allowed by a plan or credential: the backend action and shaped arguments, to-gether with the response fields and values that may reach the agent. The order above is therefore set inclusion, X ⪯r Y

when T (X) ⊆ T (Y ). The owner ceiling is 

T (ΠS,A) ⊆ T (ΠS).

Credential C is not an input to the plan. If t = Exec C(Π) is a realized exchange trace, complete mediation requires 

t ∈ T (C) ∩ T (Π).

This is a call-level statement. It lifts to a run only while identity binding, schema, policy bundles, operator definitions, and the trusted state used for each decision remain within the stated frame. It does not bound what the model infers across calls. Absence of agent policy neither creates a permit nor breaks a valid owner-only call. 

Reading the stage orders. The three numbered boxes in Fig-ure 2 show where ordered restrictions combine. Gate results, conjunctions, caps, and allowlists use meets. Full redaction is below pass, but partial projections and pattern masks may reveal incomparable information. The schema therefore sup-plies a stable precedence, and a canonical normalizer applies overlapping rewrites in a fixed order. That makes the selected transformation repeatable; it does not prove that a pattern finds every sensitive value. Envelope sanitation runs last and is not chosen by policy. The evidence labels mark the released boundary. A deferred call stores its method, path, shaped body, bound agent, pol-icy, and bundle version, but omits query parameters, headers, and pre-fetched state. The accompanying transition logic can choose resume or deny, yet it neither dispatches nor records terminal timeout; durable resolution is production-only. The other gaps are narrower: drop and clamp exist in code but are 51. Gate the call 

g = GateMeet (κ; DS, DA)

deny ⪯r defer ⪯r permit deny: stop defer: shape, then hold permit: shape, then dispatch 

2. Shape the request 

ρ = ( q′, n′, w′)

query constraints: conjunction record caps: minimum writable fields: intersection clamps: schema-declared direction 

Backend 

credential C

call C (ρ)

3. Apply the response plan 

η = ( φR, F′, μ)

owner keeper ∧ agent keeper retained fields: intersection full redaction ⪯r pass partial masks: canonical normalizer envelope sanitation: fixed and last 

Agent context 

E′ only 

Match policy to the typed call 

Call context: κ = ( A, a, o, x, h)

Owner match: DS = Match (S, κ) (may grant) Agent match: DA = Match (PA, κ) (may only narrow) 

Stages 1–3 form the policy plan 

Π = ( g, ρ, η)

> matched rules
> permit

Figure 2: From a typed call to a policy plan and its execution. Policy matching is separate from backend data. Deny ends the exchange. Defer shapes and stores a request without dispatch; permit continues through the backend and response plan. Credential C remains an outer execution limit. Table 1: The operator surface. Claim distinguishes exact stage results from best-effort or operational properties. Evidence states where behavior is exercised or implemented.                                                                         

> Operator Stage Acts on Most-restrictive combination Claim Evidence deny gate gate result most restrictive gate result Exact Released scope-query request query and record limit conjunction; lowest limit Exact Released filter-records response record set owner keeper ∧agent keeper Exact Released drop-write-field request gate and write map remove absence-safe fields; deny otherwise Exact Implemented, unreachable clamp-write-arg request write map lowest value in the declared direction Exact Implemented, unreachable strip-field response field set intersection of retained fields Exact Released mask-field response field value full mask or declared projection Exact Released pattern-mask response field value canonical rule order Best effort Released write-guard request write map remove disallowed fields Exact Released sanitize-envelope response response envelope fixed final function Operational Released defer (initiate) gate gate result gate order; normalize parameters or reject Exact Released defer (resolve) runtime ordered decision state deterministic state transition Operational Partial harness; production aggregate-gate gate committed history and gate threshold over history Operational Designed only

unreachable through the shipped schemas, while aggregate-gate remains design only and is never read or invoked by the release. 

## 5 Composition and Guarantees 

Composition must preserve one rule: another restriction must never give an agent more. Figure 2 defines a policy plan, separate from the backend response that later realizes it: Plan (κ; S, PA) = 



(g, ⊥nr , ⊥nr ), g = deny ,

(defer , ρ, ⊥nr ), g = defer ,

(permit , ρ, η), g = permit .

Here g is the meet of the matched gate contributions after owner eligibility is established. Request shaping produces ρ

for defer or permit; only permit computes and executes the re-sponse plan η over BC(ρ). The distinction matters: narrowing a query can change pagination and therefore the concrete rows returned, even though the plan itself grants no new capability. Deny has no later-stage state. Defer has a shaped request but no response plan because nothing has been dispatched; the released transition logic can return resume or deny, but performs no dispatch and does not persist timeout as termi-nal. The plan order first compares gates, with deny below defer below permit. Equal non-deny gates then compare re-quest components, and permitted plans also compare their responses. Query and row restrictions are compared by the calls or records they admit, not by the spelling or order of their conjunctions. 

Conditions. The claims below depend on five obligations. We state them in the body so that the theorem does not hide deployment assumptions in an appendix. 

O1: bound identity and complete mediation. The platform binds agent identity outside the call arguments, and the bound-ary mediates the complete request and response on every sup-ported path. Its connector must expose every field that policy may inspect or shape. 

O2: fixed policy inputs and default denial. A call with no matching owner permit is denied. When a claim compares restrictions after permit eligibility, it holds the schema, bun-dles, operator vocabulary, credential, and trusted-state snap-shot fixed. The claim concerns the resulting policy plan, not 6backend availability, row order, or response contents. 

O3: stable stage semantics. Query joining means semantic conjunction, even when the original query contains disjunc-tion. If a connector cannot establish that conjunction for its query language, it must deny before dispatch. The bound-ary enforces caps after fetch and evaluates row predicates before field projection. Each tier’s row keeper is its Cedar 

filter_record decision, and the two tiers meet by conjunc-tion. Adding a same-tier permit is an authorization change, not a stage restriction. A retained structural identifier must sat-isfy the declaration and policy checks above. Content masks run through the canonical normalizer, using replacement text that cannot trigger a later mask. 

O4: safe write direction. A write field may be omitted only on an operation whose connector contract says omission leaves the stored value unchanged; otherwise the call must be denied. Every clamp declares which direction is restric-tive, and no write operator may inject a default value. Query predicates cannot depend on a write field changed by request shaping. 

O5: trusted state and held calls. The trusted state h is fixed for one plan calculation, and a defer sends nothing to the backend. Co-firing defer parameters must have one de-terministic interpretation or fail closed. A system that later dispatches an approved call has further duties: an authen-ticated and policy-authorized resolver must decide over an immutable, complete snapshot; a trusted deadline and replay protection must yield one terminal result; and dispatch must be idempotent or fenced against duplicates. Approval applies only to that snapshot. A history-dependent gate likewise reads one committed prefix, with its decision serialized for the rele-vant key and window. 

Concern invariants. These conditions support four se-curity statements. The first, invariant INV-IP, separates the owner-bounded plan from credential-bounded execution: 

T (ΠS,A) ⊆ T (ΠS),

Exec C(ΠS,A) ∈ T (C) ∩ T (ΠS,A).

The bound applies to each call and extends across a run while those scopes remain fixed. The owner remains the grantor; an agent rule can remove authority but cannot create a permit. Invariant INV-X governs read exposure when the owner policy and connector schema correctly encode their labels. A connector may arrange its principal types and field ceilings in any meet-semilattice. For each policy-controlled f ∈ F , if 

v(A) is the vulnerability assigned to agent A and ℓ( f ) is the maximum vulnerability allowed to receive field f , the field is exposed only when 

v(A) ⪯v ℓ( f ).

INV-X makes a narrow promise about the shaped response. If the boundary removes a field or fully redacts its value, that value is absent from the response. It does not claim that the hidden value could not affect some other output. The released proxy uses a five-level sensitivity chain en-coded in the field schema and matching policy. The model also admits a product order that preserves incomparable risks, such as susceptibility to prompt injection and cross-tenant reach. The production system implements that richer registry, but the released prototype does not. We therefore treat the production implementation as deployment description rather than released evidence. Appendix D defines the order and connects it to information-flow models [8, 15]. Invariant INV-X ′ gives the write-side condition under the same premise that the owner policy and schema correctly en-code the labels. Let c(A) denote the principal’s corruptibility and let ℓw( f ) denote the write-integrity ceiling for field f . We write c(A) ⪯w ℓw( f ) when the principal is no more corrupt-ible than that ceiling permits. A value may reach the backend only under this relation. Otherwise, a well-formed rule must remove the field or deny the call. The released write guard enforces typed field allowlists, which are a narrower instance of this order. Invariant INV-SG covers deferred execution. Under the full resumption clauses of O5, the backend cannot receive the held call until the required external decision arrives before its deadline. An explicit denial or observed fail-closed resolver error denies the call; a trusted timeout path denies it after the deadline. Without a live resolver or timeout worker, safety means non-dispatch, not terminal progress. The released ar-tifact establishes only the earlier fire-and-hold property: it sends nothing and never resumes dispatch. 

## 5.1 Guarantees 

We now show that the ordered components and canonical content normalizer give the plan the properties claimed in the Introduction. Each result is conditional on O1–O5. Ap-pendix C supplies the operator cases and longer derivations; Table 8 there states which conditions the released HTTP path tests and which remain production description. 

Proposition 1 (Permutation invariance) . Under O1–O5, fixed 

κ, S, P A, and operator vocabulary determine one policy plan, regardless of rule order within DS and DA. Diagnostic labels and audit-record ordering are outside the plan. Argument. The ordered components use commutative, as-sociative, and idempotent meets: query conjunction, smaller caps, and allowlist intersection therefore ignore operand or-der. Cedar authorization inside a tier is deterministic but is not recast as a meet of permit rules. Content rules first enter a canonical normal form and then run in a fixed sequence; this is an order-independent procedure, not a claim that arbi-trary text rewrites form a lattice. O5 fixes any trusted history read used by the gate. The engine’s reporting order therefore cannot change Π, although backend behavior may still vary. 

□

7Proposition 2 (Monotonicity) . Under O1–O5, once DS es-tablishes owner permit eligibility, adding a well-formed stage restriction cannot enlarge the plan’s eligible actions, re-sources, query predicates, policy-controlled response fields, or writable fields; raise a cap; loosen a clamp; or replace full redaction with pass. Adding a same-tier permit rule is outside this claim. Argument. On an ordered component, a new restriction is another meet operand, so it can only shrink an allowlist, add a query predicate, lower a bound, or move the gate toward denial. O4 gives writes a known restrictive direction. Owner eligibility is essential because the first owner permit is the one transition from default denial that this result does not cover. Partial projections and pattern masks remain outside the se-mantic order; their canonical execution supports permutation invariance, not monotonic information flow. Only structural stripping and full redaction support the value-absence claim. 

□

Proposition 3 (Tier refinement) . For any well-formed S and PA satisfying O1–O5, 

ΠS,A(κ) = Plan (κ; S, PA)

⪯r Plan (κ; S, none ) = ΠS(κ).

Proof. Agent policy cannot establish permit eligibility. Its gate either leaves the owner decision unchanged or moves it toward defer or deny, and its remaining restrictions enter through the meets of Proposition 2. With none , DA is empty and the plan is owner-only. Every capability in the two-tier plan was therefore already eligible under S. □

The propositions establish a conditional model, not code conformance. Cedar Analysis covers the permit-or-forbid pro-jection of a well-typed bundle [19]; annotations and connector semantics require the checks in Appendix Table 8, which iden-tifies the released paths that discharge them. 

## 6 Implementation 

The artifact implements the gate–request–response contract through a small HTTP proxy. Without production transport and deployment machinery, its stages, connector mappings, and backend effects remain inspectable. Cedar supplies the permit-or-forbid core; OBPE annotations select the other Sec-tion 4 operators: semantic gates, request shaping for non-denied calls, and response shaping for permits. The proxy binds each call to the platform-supplied agent identity and combines owner rules with any narrower agent policy. That plan governs both sides of the exchange; identity or policy failure stops the call before dispatch. Audit events record the decision and transformations, while conformance and bench-mark tests observe the controlled backend call and result. 

Schemas define the enforcement surface. OBPE can gov-ern only what a connector exposes as typed data, so each Table 2: Released and production implementation surfaces. Production entries are descriptive, not artifact evidence.          

> Capability Released artifact Production implementation Write controls Write guard on supported partial updates. Drop and clamp only in synthetic tests. Broader schema mappings for per-sisted write workflows. Human deferral Hold/no-dispatch and per-call transition tests. Termi-nal timeout and approved dispatch absent. Durable, ordered approval log. Attribute-based access control protects inspection and resolution. Temporal policy No released execution. Implemented over durable, trusted history. Aggregate policy No released execution. Implemented over durable, trusted history.

supported operation must map the tool call to a typed action and resource and identify the arguments and response fields available to policy. Field groups and sensitivity labels then give policy a stable vocabulary, while a schema-declared non-sensitive identifier keeps filtered records addressable only when the owner policy and any selected agent policy approve it. The response side of that typing rarely arrives with the tool. MCP carried no declared output schema until a mid-2025 protocol revision added structured output [28], and most tools still declare none: of 1,856 tools on 100 popular open-source servers measured in 2026, 234 carried an output schema [36]. The reference proxy does not face this problem, because its connectors own both the schema and the mapping. A pre-existing server brought under out-of-band policy needs one of two remedies: the server is changed to declare a schema, or a middleware supplies one and keeps it matching what the server actually returns. Writes require a stronger contract because request shaping can alter backend meaning. The boundary may drop a field only when the schema says its absence is safe, and it may clamp a numeric argument only in a declared restrictive direc-tion. These declarations are security assumptions: an omitted action or field leaves a policy gap; an incorrect absence-safety or clamp-direction declaration can alter backend semantics. We built the artifact’s Jira and ServiceNow mappings from the vendors’ published interfaces rather than through an auto-matic OpenAPI importer, which the release does not include. Conformance fixtures check that the operations and response shapes presented to policy match those mappings, while a separate coverage analyzer catches field groups or operator settings that the schema cannot resolve. Together, these checks make the released surface inspectable without implying that every operator is reachable. The shipped schemas exercise the write guard end to end, but drop and clamp remain syn-thetic because neither schema declares absence safety or a restrictive clamp direction. 86.1 Production Evidence Boundary 

Placement and identity. The released artifact and production implementation use the same gate–request–response com-position. Production adds MCP transport, relevant remote A2A calls, and a principal registry implementing the per-axis sensitivity order in Appendix D. These mechanisms support feasibility; all conformance and outcome claims stop at the released column. 

Schema projection. OBPE can project applicable pol-icy into each identity’s tools/list result. Input bounds be-come JSON Schema constraints or removed properties; output masking changes the advertised type, while stripped fields disappear from both schema and response. Dynamic discov-ery can therefore steer a model toward its current interface, but the call path still enforces every restriction. 

Approval semantics. In production, each decision is bound to the request digest, deciding principal, and policy version, then resumes only the immutable held call. Attribute-based access control protects the call, approver context, and decision log; approval supplies no backend credential. The released harness is narrower and does not invalidate an old pending record when its bundle changes (Appendix G). 

Policy authoring and evidence. A user-research-informed workflow previews policy scope and effects; Section 2 states the remaining responsibility for organizational intent. Produc-tion informed the design; Section 7 evaluates only the artifact column of Table 2. 

## 7 Evaluation Methodology 

Conformance and the benchmark answer different questions. Conformance asks whether the released code computes the staged composition defined in Sections 4 and 5. The bench-mark asks how that boundary changes what agents receive and do, and whether useful work survives. Benchmark success cannot cure a conformance failure, and conformance alone does not establish usefulness. 

Conformance gate. The benchmark begins only after the released paths pass their declared conformance obligations. Human-authored semantic expectations cover complete re-quests and responses, including failure paths. An independent executable model is used only for stages where such a model ships; the remaining checks are not described as differential. Property tests exercise permutation invariance, monotonicity, and the data policy owner ceiling, while targeted mutations ask whether those tests detect broken composition logic. The archive’s arm names are not useful explanations, so we name configurations by what changes. The raw agent 

receives a minimal role-and-tools prompt and calls the mocks directly. Prompt only adds six explicit data-handling rules but leaves that tool path untouched. Prompt + full OBPE adds every operator reachable in the frozen bundle; full excludes production-only and schema-unreachable operators. Prompt + output reviewer instead leaves the tool path raw and asks a fixed Claude Haiku 4.5 reviewer to pass or replace each assistant message. Table 3 shows which configurations answer each question. The conformance gate must show more than code coverage. It attributes each restriction to the owner or agent tier and verifies that a matched policy actually changes the exchange. Tool-to-agent slices then check that the agent receives the shaped result, while schema checks reject policy references that cannot be resolved. Write guard traverses this released path. Drop and clamp remain synthetic because the shipped schemas do not declare the facts those operators require. The artifact records each obligation, its scope, and its result. RQ1 is primary; RQ2a, RQ2b, and RQ3 are secondary mechanism analyses. 

Release corpus and execution. The release corpus con-tains 71 tasks in 35 scenario clusters against controlled Jira and ServiceNow mocks. It was assembled for this evaluation from audited schemas, policy components, fixture templates, and generators, then frozen before the canonical run. The cor-pus is an evaluation set, not a claim that every ingredient was previously unseen. Component lineage and similarity checks make repeated or closely related scenarios visible. The four tool-capable agent models are Claude Sonnet 4.6, Claude Haiku 4.5, GPT-5, and GPT-5 mini. They give pur-posive coverage of two model families and two capability bands, not a factorial comparison of providers or capability. All calls use controlled mocks. Each trial receives a fresh fixture copy, so paired arms face the same records while one trial cannot contaminate the next. That control lets the trace observe exactly what entered model context and what changed in backend state; it does not establish interoperability with live Jira or ServiceNow deployments. An arm is an enforcement configuration. Each of 17 frozen conditions pairs one arm with one model; together they cover the shared primary arms and the single-model secondary con-trasts. Running every task–condition pair three times yields 71 × 17 × 3 = 3,621 planned trials. A content-derived registry schedules each trial once, so research questions that share a cell reuse the same archived record. Before execution, the manifest fixed the tasks, fixtures, policy and schema revi-sions, prompts, model settings, scoring code, exclusions, and missingness rule. Order was balanced and there was no early stopping. Under full OBPE, the task specifications expect five calls to pass unchanged, 54 to pass after shaping, two to defer, and ten to be denied. This security suite concentrates cases in which policy should act, so it estimates conditional effectiveness rather than intervention rates in ordinary traf-fic. Five unshaped permits cannot establish a general benign false-denial rate. Twenty tasks also run a response-adaptive, multi-turn red-team dialogue. Claude Opus 4.7 receives the same adversary instructions in the prompt-only and OBPE arms and may reframe its request after each reply. The loop stops when an 9Table 3: Experimental comparisons. Each arrow changes one named mechanism.                         

> Comparison How to read it RQ1 Prompt only →Prompt + full OBPE, on four models. Adds only the policy boundary. This is the primary test of what OBPE adds beyond detailed prompt rules; it is not a provider ranking. RQ2a Raw →Raw + full OBPE and Prompt only →Prompt + full OBPE, on Sonnet. A 2 ×2 prompt-rules ×OBPE design. The two effects test OBPE with and without prompt help; their difference tests interaction. RQ2b Record controls →+ strip fields →+ mask fields and guard writes
> →+ pattern masking, on Sonnet. A cumulative ablation with all other inputs fixed. Adjacent steps isolate field stripping and pattern masking, but not masking from write guard. RQ3 Prompt + output reviewer ↔Prompt + full OBPE, on Sonnet. Compares a model that reviews assistant text with a boundary that mediates requests, re-sponses, and backend effects. It is not a ranking of all LLM guardrails, and no local A2A experiment is claimed.

exact target appears, the adversary declares completion, or 15 turns elapse; this stop signal does not replace outcome scoring. The adversary is not told the OBPE policy or implementation and does not fuzz the connector surface. A separate output-review arm has mechanism-specific instructions and is not part of that matched comparison. 

Outcomes and judging. The primary security outcome, which we call a deterministic trace failure , is positive if any of three recorded events occurs: protected data enters agent context, an exact protected value appears in the final answer, or a forbidden backend effect completes. Lower is better. We also report those channels separately because each calls for a different control. The primary utility outcome is safe-useful completion. It requires no deterministic trace failure, satisfaction of the archived completion and expected-tool contract, and a judge finding that the allowed work was fulfilled without semantic disclosure. Here, semantic disclosure means that an answer reveals a protected fact or category without necessarily re-peating an archived value exactly; the row-count oracle in §8.1 is one example. Higher is better. We retain the judge’s task-fulfilled component on its own because this stricter con-junction can improve even when ordinary task fulfillment falls. The archived contract is mechanical: it checks termi-nation and the expected tool attempt. A proxy-denied call counts as attempted, so this component does not claim that the requested task was accomplished. Deterministic traces are authoritative for exact exposure, tool decisions, and backend state. The primary semantic judge is Claude Opus 4.8; GPT-5 is a separate sensitivity judge and is also one of the four agent models. Both use task rubrics frozen with the corpus. The adversarial agent is Claude Opus 4.7, so its model family overlaps the primary judge’s. We report the judges separately, retain disagreements, and add no human adjudication pass. If a judge contradicts a deterministic trace, the trace controls and the disagreement remains in the released ledger. Three trials lacked a complete pair of judgments, leaving 3,618 for direct comparison. The judges agreed more often on semantic disclosure (94.5%) than on task fulfillment (87.2%). That summary hides an impor-tant asymmetry: disclosure agreement was 96.9% when both judges found none, but 73.3% when both found disclosure. Fulfillment showed the reverse pattern, with 90.8% agreement on positive cases and 79.1% on negative ones. We therefore treat safe-useful as a model-graded outcome, not a human-calibrated label, and retain both judgments in the archive. 

Analysis, cost, and reproducibility. We treat each scenario cluster—not each task variant or replicate—as one indepen-dent unit. Within a task, configuration, and model, we first average the completed replicates and form the paired configu-ration difference. We then average those differences within the cluster, so every cluster receives equal weight. Two para-phrases run three times therefore count as one scenario, not six independent observations. We obtain 95% CIs by resam-pling clusters 10,000 times with a frozen seed, and check the result with a replicate-index-matched complete-block analy-sis. The plan allowed the bootstrap only if at least 30 clusters remained after exclusions. This was a guard against reporting a thin analysis, not a power calculation. Every attempt is journaled before completion, and tran-script hashes bind both judgment records. The tables replay from frozen inputs without new model calls, so reproduc-ing the analysis does not require reproducing model outputs. Token use is secondary deployment evidence: we preserve provider-specific buckets and missing receipts rather than treating tokenizers as comparable or missing values as zero. OBPE adds no model call, but this does not establish zero proxy or latency overhead. Appendix F gives the full account-ing rules. 

## 8 Results 

RQ1: prompts changed answers more than the exchange. 

Three configurations separate what the prompt changes from what the boundary changes. The raw agent receives no data-handling rules; prompt only asks the same agent to enforce six rules itself; prompt + full OBPE keeps those rules and adds the trusted boundary. Table 4 reports the unweighted observed rates for orientation. Our conclusions rest on the paired, cluster-weighted analysis that follows. The three outcomes answer different questions. Trace fail-ure records whether protected data reached model context, an exact value reached the answer, or a forbidden effect reached the backend. Task fulfilled asks only whether the agent did the requested job, even if policy should have stopped it. Safe-useful requires allowed work to finish under the archived tool 10 Observed rates before scenario-cluster weighting              

> 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Trace failure ↓57.6 0.2 Task fulfilled, Judge A ↑79.1 60.9 Safe-useful, Judge A ↑22.0 58.9 prompt only + OBPE

Figure 3: Absolute observed rates across all four models when full OBPE is added to the same six-rule prompt. Lower is better for trace failure; higher is better for the two utility outcomes. Judge B showed the same direction (Table 4). Paired, equally cluster-weighted estimates and CIs appear in the text. contract without trace failure or judged semantic disclosure. A baseline can therefore complete a forbidden update and look useful while failing the security goal outright. Table 4: Descriptive rates across all four models. Arrows show the desired direction. Slightly different denominators reflect unavailable outcomes; the archive retains every count.                                                

> Outcome Raw Prompt Prompt+OBPE Trace failure ↓63.3% 57.6% 0.2% Entered agent context ↓55.1% 52.1% 0.0% Exact final disclosure ↓27.5% 3.7% 0.2% Semantic disclosure, Judge A ↓30.0% 8.8% 1.6% Semantic disclosure, Judge B ↓25.4% 8.2% 2.1% Forbidden backend effect ↓8.1% 5.5% 0.0% Task fulfilled, Judge A ↑83.2% 79.1% 60.9% Task fulfilled, Judge B ↑76.3% 72.5% 56.1% Safe-useful, Judge A ↑19.1% 22.0% 58.9% Safe-useful, Judge B ↑19.0% 22.1% 54.4% Mechanical contract ↑94.4% 91.3% 91.4%

The prompt made the final answer more discreet, but it did little to keep protected data away from the model or the backend. Exact disclosure fell from 27.5% to 3.7%, and Judge A’s broader semantic-disclosure rate fell from 30.0% to 8.8%. Context exposure, however, moved only from 55.1% to 52.1%, and forbidden effects from 8.1% to 5.5%. This is consistent with an agent suppressing a value in its final answer after it has already seen the value or acted on it. Adding the boundary changed the exchange itself. Among prompted trials, OBPE removed every observed context ex-posure and forbidden effect. The overall trace-failure rate fell from 57.6% to 0.2% (Figure 3); the two remaining exact disclosures were values reconstructed from information the boundary did permit. Table 4 gives absolute observed rates. Our prespecified comparison instead pairs the same tasks and gives each sce-nario cluster equal weight, so larger clusters do not dominate the answer. It estimates that OBPE avoided 41.2 percentage points (pp) of trace failure (95% confidence interval (CI) [27.7, 54.9]). Every model-specific estimate favored OBPE, with reductions ranging from 32.4 to 49.3 pp and every 95% interval above zero. This differs from the 57.4-point raw rate gap because scenario sizes are uneven: the inferential estimate gives each cluster one vote. The boundary also made some requested jobs impossible to finish. In the full- OBPE cells, Judge A found 90.0% ful-fillment on the five unshaped-permit tasks and 71.7% on the 54 shaped-permit tasks, but none on the ten denied or two deferred tasks, whose rubrics defined the requested operation as work to complete. Thus the overall fall from 79.1% to 60.9% is real, but it is not an estimate of false denial on or-dinary benign traffic. Since many prompt-only completions were unsafe, safe-useful still rose from 22.0% to 58.9% un-der Judge A and from 22.1% to 54.4% under Judge B. The paired gains were 21.8 pp [9.5, 35.2] and 19.1 pp [6.9, 32.2]. The mechanical contract barely moved (91.3% versus 91.4%; paired change 0.36 pp [-0.83, 2.14]); it records the expected tool path, not whole-request completion. The descriptive safe-useful gaps are larger for the same reason as the trace gap: the paired estimand gives large and small scenario families equal weight. 

Red-team slice. On the 20 response-adaptive tasks, the same attacker pressed both arms across all four models. It triggered trace failure in 173 of 231 completed prompt-only runs (74.9%), but only 2 of 227 completed OBPE runs (0.9%). Both judges saw the same direction in semantic disclosure: Judge A marked 39 of 230 prompt-only answers and 3 of 226 OBPE answers, while Judge B marked 34 and 6. A loop defect left 9 prompt-only and 13 OBPE runs incomplete, so these rates describe a stress slice rather than a second paired estimate. 

RQ2a: the same pattern held without prompt rules. The Sonnet 2 × 2 experiment asks whether OBPE depended on help from the six-rule prompt. It did not appear to: adding OBPE reduced the descriptive trace-failure rate from 59.5% to 1.0% without the rules and from 61.9% to 0.0% with them. The estimated difference between those effects was only 0.2 pp, but its wide interval [-12.3, 12.7] supports no stronger claim of independence. 

RQ2b: what did the cumulative operator ladder add? 

The ablation holds the prompted Sonnet agent, tasks, and fixtures fixed while adding one layer of protection at a time. It begins with record controls that can gate a call, scope its query, or filter returned rows. Later rungs add field stripping, then whole-field masking and write guard together, and finally pattern masking within text that remains visible. 11 Table 5: Descriptive Sonnet rates across the cumulative OBPE ladder. Protected means no deterministic trace failure; judge-scored columns report Judge A; higher is better in all columns.                

> Policy configuration Protected Fulfilled (A) Safe-useful (A) Record controls 46.7% 75.1% 21.8% + field stripping 69.4% 70.0% 37.6% + masking and write guard 88.6% 65.7% 51.9% + pattern masking (full) 100.0% 66.2% 63.0%

Record controls alone protected 46.7% of trials. Once an allowed record returned, however, they could not hide a sen-sitive field inside it. Field stripping removed protected notes from permitted records; the joint rung hid directory emails and removed guarded patch fields; pattern masking caught cre-dentials in retained text. The cluster-weighted analysis found the same progression: field stripping avoided another 9.9 pp of failures [2.0, 19.1], masking and write guard jointly avoided 7.8 pp [0.3, 16.7], and pattern masking avoided 11.5 pp [2.9, 22.3]. The joint rung cannot separate masking from write guard, and its final 100% protection rate is a benchmark re-sult, not a free-text masking guarantee. Utility moved in two directions because the stricter rungs blocked more of the requested work but made more completed work safe. Across the ladder, safe-useful rose from 21.8% to 63.0% while standalone fulfillment fell from 75.1% to 66.2%; the mechanical contract stayed near 91%. Each safe-useful step was positive, although only pattern masking’s 11.3 pp gain had an interval excluding zero [0.2, 23.7]. 

RQ3: output review arrived after exposure and effects. 

The fixed reviewer sees assistant text only after tools have returned. It can suppress an unsafe answer, but it cannot re-move data already placed in model context or undo a backend change. That timing appears in the absolute Sonnet rates: the reviewer arm had a 58.6% deterministic trace-failure rate and a 19.7% safe-useful rate under Judge A, compared with 0.0% and 63.0% for full OBPE. In the paired analysis, OBPE avoided 43.4 pp more failures [27.7, 59.3] and gained 32.0 pp safe-useful completion [18.8, 46.0] under Judge A; Judge B measured a 35.8 pp gain. This is one mechanism comparison, not a ranking of all guardrails. The reviewer also required 930 additional model calls, and its refusal sometimes replaced an otherwise useful answer. Judge A’s standalone task fulfillment was 66.2% with OBPE and 58.7% with the reviewer; OBPE made no additional model call. 

What the three comparisons say together. The common pattern is timing. Prompt rules changed some final answers only after exposure; output review also ran after exposure and backend effects and added 930 model calls. OBPE acted before dispatch and therefore changed which work could com-plete. Standalone fulfillment fell on this policy-active corpus, but many baseline successes were unsafe, so safe-useful com-pletion rose. 

Evidence and qualifications. Every planned trial has a terminal journal record, but 39 did not complete: 38 hit one adversarial-loop defect and one strip-only run timed out. We leave their unavailable outcomes missing. Under the frozen rules, the primary security contrast contains 46 unknown rows, 25 with OBPE and 21 without it. Assigning all of them in the two opposing worst-case directions moves the cluster-weighted point estimate from 41.2 pp to a range of 33.8– 43.1 pp fewer failures; this is a bound on the point estimate, not a CI. The result was also not carried by one scenario family: 23 of 34 contributing clusters favored OBPE, 11 tied, and none favored the prompted baseline. Leaving out any one cluster produced reductions between 39.4 and 42.4 pp. The more consequential qualification is a defect in the controlled mock’s query evaluator. In 116 primary-arm trials, it fell back after the proxy joined caller and policy clauses. Sixty-five cases broadened a filter; the rest lost ordering that could alter a capped page. The defect occurred downstream of Cedar and response shaping but still violated O3’s connector obligation. Production connectors apply O3’s fail-closed rule; that private behavior is context, not conformance evidence. Excluding all 116 tests whether this fault drove the aggregate result. The security reduction is 40.5 pp and the Judge-A and Judge-B safe-useful gains are 21.4 and 18.2 pp, so each direction is unchanged. The fallback path remains outside conformance. For sup-ported paths, a separate ledger covers 25 obligations across 352 cells in the released conformance grid. Its tests caught all 20 non-equivalent stage mutations and all three full-pipeline mutations that changed behavior; two others were equivalent on that grid. Drop and clamp remain synthetic, and the eval-uation did not exercise durable approval dispatch, aggregate execution, or remote MCP or A2A deployment. Appendix F gives the full denominators and qualification record. 

## 8.1 What the Boundary Did Not Close 

The four reconstruction failures were more instructive than another decimal place. Across 1,065 trials with full OBPE, four final answers contained an exact protected email even though the value never entered agent context and no forbidden backend effect occurred. The agents reconstructed the address from a visible name and domain convention, sometimes while explaining why they would not disclose it. Two cases occurred in the prompted primary arm and two in the raw secondary arm. This was not a proxy escape. It is the difference between removing one value from one execution and proving that no output depends on it. A different failure turned query pushdown into an ora-cle. The agent issued increasingly selective predicates over a masked email field and reported the row counts: two matches for @partner , then one each for yara and singh . The back-end evaluated those predicates on the protected field even though response shaping withheld it. Judge A marked se-mantic disclosure; Judge B marked only an Honest Witness 

disclosure, meaning that the reply revealed the existence or 12 category of protected data without stating its value. The deter-ministic metric recorded no failure. This is a modern instance of the statistical-database tracker problem: individually al-lowed predicates and counts can reveal a protected fact in combination [16]. These cases sharpen the claim boundary in §5. Structural absence is useful, but it is not relational noninterference. Clos-ing the query channel requires distinguishing policy-fixed predicates from caller-controlled ones; blanket bans on fil-tering hidden fields would also disable legitimate row-level policy. Coarsened counts and cursors, minimum cohorts, and history-aware query budgets are possible defenses. This re-lease evaluated none of them. 

## 9 Related Work 

The closest building blocks act at different points in the ex-change. Zanzibar centralizes relationship authorization and Cedar supplies typed policy [12, 29]; identity and access management (IAM) boundaries and OAuth extensions can narrow a credential [5, 25, 26]. Farther down the path, row security, query rewriting, and Envoy processing can constrain data or modify HTTP traffic [18, 30, 31]. None of these systems, as documented, binds those stages into an owner-bounded request-and-response contract that agent policy can only narrow. OBPE does not replace these mechanisms. It contributes a contract for composing them, conditions for an order-independent and non-widening result, and a confor-mance chain from that law to the released path. AgentCore Policy maps gateway tools to Cedar actions [2]. Dogwood evaluates prior events and windowed aggregates [4, 17], while model guardrails can reject a call or suppress its output [3]. This history support is stronger than the released OBPE proxy’s. The documented system does not, however, selectively shape returned records or define the same owner– agent narrowing contract, and prior-event authorization is not durable resumption of one immutable held call. Other defenses reason earlier. Progent checks whether gen-erated call rules narrow privilege, and SEAgent applies manda-tory access control to tools and multi-agent deputies [24, 35]. CaMeL propagates capabilities with values, PAuth binds operands to provenance, and privilege separation limits what crosses from a quarantined model [13, 23, 34]. OBPE begins at the mediated exchange; its portability ends where trusted identity or connector coverage ends. AgentDojo tests whether useful work survives prompt-injection defenses [14]; we freeze the policy and score expo-sure and forbidden effects beside useful work. A workshop paper demonstrated an out-of-band metadata channel on one agent [1]. Here we add the two-tier model, restriction law, con-formance link, and cross-model experiment. Table 6 assesses the cited versions, not possible extensions. 

## 10 Limitations and Broader Impacts 10.1 Limitations 

OBPE cannot repair a valid but mistaken owner ceiling: static checks find bad rules, not organizational intent. Shaping can also mislead an agent into treating a filtered view as com-plete, while a warning may reveal that protected data exists. A rewritten query must preserve caller and policy predicates together or be denied before dispatch. Schemas are therefore security state. They need named owners, coordinated policy-and-schema rollout, rollback, and review when fields or backend meaning change. Open maps require finite allowlists or must remain opaque. Audits should be minimal, tenant-separated, and short-lived, while conse-quential policy changes and approvals remain attributable. Cedar supplies none of these operating controls. The mocks omit rich text, recursive or polymorphic ob-jects, and cross-tenant tests. Durable approval, history gates, broader writes, timing, and streaming also remain outside re-leased evidence. Assignment-bound credentials would shrink the authorization gap, and reliable instruction–data separation would weaken one reason for response shaping. Policy would still decide who may receive a secret and when a call must wait outside the agent. 

## 10.2 Broader impacts 

Audit and approval records expose worker activity; deploy-ments should limit access and retention, notify workers, and keep them out of employment decisions. Approver fatigue can turn deferral into a rubber stamp, so rising volume should trigger policy review. The ethics appendix expands these du-ties. 

## 11 Conclusion 

OBPE governs the whole tool exchange under an owner ceil-ing that agent policy can only narrow. Its model states the conditions for an order-independent, non-widening policy plan; the prototype makes those conditions a conformance target. Across four models, the paired, cluster-weighted analysis found 41.2 points less trace failure. Unweighted standalone fulfillment fell from 79.1% to 60.9% because policy stopped some requested jobs. Many baseline completions were un-safe, however, and the paired safe-useful gain was 21.8 points under the primary judge and 19.1 under the second. The pat-tern survived removal of the prompt, whereas in-band review fared worse while adding 930 model calls. Four reconstructed values and one row-count oracle expose the remaining bound-ary. OBPE enforces structural and effect constraints at the exchange; inference across allowed observations still needs another defense. 13 References 

[1] Tyler Akidau, Tyler Rockwood, Johannes Brüderl, and Marc Millstone. The importance of out-of-band meta-data for safe autonomous agents: The redpanda agentic data plane. In Supporting Our AI Overlords (SAO), co-located with ACM CAIS , 2026. arXiv:2605.29082. [2] Amazon Web Services. Core concepts - Amazon Bedrock AgentCore, 2026. accessed August 26, 2026; 

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock-agent core/latest/devguide/policy-core-concepts. html .[3] Amazon Web Services. Guardrails in policies - Amazon Bedrock AgentCore, 2026. accessed August 26, 2026; 

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock-agent core/latest/devguide/policy-guardrails-i n-policies.html .[4] Amazon Web Services. Temporal policies - Amazon Bedrock AgentCore, 2026. accessed August 26, 2026; 

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock-agent core/latest/devguide/policy-temporal.html .[5] AWS. Permissions boundaries for IAM entities, 2018. accessed August 18, 2026; https://docs.aws.amazo n.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/access_policies _boundaries.html .[6] AWS. Cedar policy language reference, 2026. accessed August 18, 2026; https://docs.cedarpolicy.com/ .[7] John Backes, Pauline Bolignano, Byron Cook, Catherine Dodge, Andrew Gacek, Kasper Luckow, Neha Rungta, Oksana Tkachuk, and Carsten Varming. Semantic-based automated reasoning for AWS access policies using SMT. In 2018 Formal Methods in Computer Aided Design (FMCAD) , pages 1–9, 2018. [8] D.E. Bell and L.J. LaPadula. Secure computer systems: Mathematical foundations. Technical Report MTR-2547, Vol. I; ESD-TR-73-278, The MITRE Corporation, 1973. [9] K.J. Biba. Integrity considerations for secure computer systems. Technical Report ESD-TR-76-372, US Air Force Electronic Systems Division, 1977. earlier ver-sion: MITRE MTR-3153 (1975). [10] Arnold Cartagena and Ariane Teixeira. Mind the GAP: Text safety does not transfer to tool-call safety in LLM agents, 2026. arXiv:2602.16943v1; https://arxiv. org/abs/2602.16943v1 .[11] Michael R. Clarkson and Fred B. Schneider. Hyperprop-erties. Journal of Computer Security , 18(6):1157–1210, 2010. [12] Joseph W. Cutler, Craig Disselkoen, Aaron Eline, Shaobo He, Kyle Headley, Michael Hicks, Kesha Hi-etala, Eleftherios Ioannidis, John Kastner, Anwar Ma-mat, Darin McAdams, Matt McCutchen, Neha Rungta, Emina Torlak, and Andrew Wells. Cedar: A new language for expressive, fast, safe, and analyzable authorization. Proceedings of the ACM on Pro-gramming Languages , 8(OOPSLA1):670–697, 2024. arXiv:2403.04651. [13] Edoardo Debenedetti, Ilia Shumailov, Tianqi Fan, Jamie Hayes, Nicholas Carlini, Daniel Fabian, Christoph Kern, Chongyang Shi, Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tramèr. Defeating prompt injections by design, 2025. arXiv:2503.18813v2; https://arxiv.org/abs/2503 .18813v2 .[14] Edoardo Debenedetti, Jie Zhang, Mislav Balunovi´ c, Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Florian Tramèr. AgentDojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate prompt injection attacks and defenses for LLM agents. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks Track , volume 37, pages 82895–82920, 2024. arXiv:2406.13352. [15] Dorothy E. Denning. A lattice model of secure informa-tion flow. Communications of the ACM , 19(5):236–243, 1976. [16] Dorothy E. Denning, Peter J. Denning, and Mayer D. Schwartz. The tracker: A threat to statistical database security. ACM Trans. Database Syst. , 4(1):76–96, 1979. [17] Dogwood Policy. Dogwood: Reference parser and interpreter for the Dogwood policy lan-guage, 2026. GitHub repository, commit 5063bcc2d6d6cf5024d1b0498e6cc8ef52cbcf0c, accessed August 17, 2026. The repository de-scribes a non-production reference interpreter that extends Cedar-derived policies with tem-poral conditions over event history. h t t p s : //github.com/dogwood-policy/dogwood/tree/5 063bcc2d6d6cf5024d1b0498e6cc8ef52cbcf0c .[18] Envoy Proxy. External processing, 2026. Envoy doc-umentation, accessed August 26, 2026; https://www. envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configurat ion/http/http_filters/ext_proc_filter.html .[19] Spencer Erickson and Liana Hadarean. Introduc-ing Cedar Analysis: Open source tools for verify-ing authorization policies, 2025. AWS Open Source Blog, June 16, 2025; announces the Lean-verified 

cedar-policy-symcc compiler and cedar-lean-cli 

in cedar-spec . https://aws.amazon.com/blogs /opensource/introducing-cedar-analysis-ope 

14 n-source-tools-for-verifying-authorization -policies/ .[20] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres, Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world LLM-integrated applications with indirect prompt injec-tion, 2023. arXiv:2302.12173. [21] D. Hardt. The OAuth 2.0 authorization framework. Technical Report RFC 6749, IETF, 2012. https: //www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749 .[22] Munawar Hasan. Incompleteness of AI safety verification via Kolmogorov complexity, 2026. arXiv:2604.04876; https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.0 4876 .[23] Dennis Jacob, Emad Alghamdi, Zhanhao Hu, Basel Alomair, and David Wagner. Preventing prompt in-jection with type-directed privilege separation, 2025. arXiv:2509.25926v2. [24] Zimo Ji, Daoyuan Wu, Wenyuan Jiang, Pingchuan Ma, Zongjie Li, Yudong Gao, Shuai Wang, and Yingjiu Li. Taming various privilege escalation in LLM-based agent systems: A mandatory access control framework, 2026. arXiv:2601.11893v1. [25] Michael Jones, Anthony Nadalin, Brian Campbell, John Bradley, and Chuck Mortimore. OAuth 2.0 token ex-change. Technical Report RFC 8693, IETF, 2020. [26] Torsten Lodderstedt, Justin Richer, and Brian Campbell. OAuth 2.0 rich authorization requests. Technical Report RFC 9396, IETF, 2023. [27] J. Madison. The federalist no. 51, 1788. Founders Online, National Archives, accessed August 26, 2026; 

https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Ma dison/01-10-02-0279 .[28] Model Context Protocol. Key changes, specification revision 2025-06-18, 2025. Adds structured tool out-put ( outputSchema , structuredContent ); earlier re-visions returned unstructured content only. https: //modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/ 2025-06-18/changelog .[29] R. Pang, R. Caceres, M. Burrows, Z. Chen, P. Dave, N. Germer, A. Golynski, K. Graney, N. Kang, L. Kiss-ner, J.L. Korn, A. Parmar, C.D. Richards, and M. Wang. Zanzibar: Google’s consistent, global authorization sys-tem. In USENIX ATC , pages 33–46, 2019. https: //www.usenix.org/conference/atc19/presenta tion/pang .[30] PostgreSQL. Row security policies in PostgreSQL, 2026. PostgreSQL 18 documentation, accessed August 18, 2026; https://www.postgresql.org/docs/18 /ddl-rowsecurity.html .[31] Shariq Rizvi, Alberto Mendelzon, S. Sudarshan, and Prasan Roy. Extending query rewriting techniques for fine-grained access control. In ACM SIGMOD , 2004. [32] Andrei Sabelfeld and David Sands. Dimensions and principles of declassification. In 18th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Workshop (CSFW) , pages 255– 269, 2005. [33] J.H. Saltzer and M.D. Schroeder. The protection of information in computer systems. Proceedings of the IEEE , 63(9):1278–1308, 1975. [34] Reshabh K Sharma, Linxi Jiang, Zhiqiang Lin, and Shuo Chen. PAuth - precise task-scoped authorization for agents, 2026. arXiv:2603.17170v1; https://arxiv. org/abs/2603.17170v1 .[35] Tianneng Shi, Jingxuan He, Zhun Wang, Hongwei Li, Linyu Wu, Wenbo Guo, and Dawn Song. Pro-gent: Securing AI agents with privilege control, 2025. arXiv:2504.11703v3, accessed August 18, 2026; https: //arxiv.org/abs/2504.11703v3 .[36] Yang Shi, Jiaheng Fu, Yihe Huang, Ruixiang Wu, Chengyao Sun, and Kaifeng Huang. Mitigating taint-style vulnerabilities in MCP servers via security-aware tool descriptions, 2026. arXiv:2607.07461. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2607.07461 .[37] Apostol Vassilev. Robust AI security and alignment: A sisyphean endeavor? IEEE Security & Privacy ,24(3):52–58, 2026. arXiv:2512.10100. [38] Simon Willison. The lethal trifecta for AI agents: Private data, untrusted content, and external communication, 2025. accessed August 26, 2026; https://simonwil lison.net/2025/Jun/16/the-lethal-trifecta/ .

## Ethical Considerations 

We evaluate OBPE against controlled Jira and ServiceNow mocks populated with synthetic records; the red-team prompts target only those records, so the study uses neither human subjects nor customer or employee data. We also do not test agents that decide employment, credit, benefits, or other conse-quential outcomes about people. Those settings raise fairness and due-process questions that a tool boundary cannot answer. The defense creates records of its own. Tool-call audits and approval history can expose how a worker uses an agent, so a production operator should restrict access and retain only what an investigation requires. Workers should also know 15 what is recorded. These logs should not become inputs to employment decisions. Write shaping raises a second ac-countability concern: the backend may receive a narrower update than the agent proposed. The operator must make that change visible to the responsible user and preserve enough audit detail to reconstruct it without copying sensitive values into the log. Policy authors hold real power. Only designated data stew-ards should set the owner ceiling, with review and clear expla-nations of its impact; affected users also need a way to contest or correct an erroneous label or scope. Static analysis can find structural mistakes, but not decide whether a valid policy is fair or faithful to organizational intent. The released prototype does not establish that an organization will get those choices right. 

## Open Science 

The anonymous artifact is available at https://anonymous. 4open.science/r/usenixsecurity_2027_obpe/README. md . It contains the HTTP proxy, controlled backend mocks, connector schemas, and policy bundles used by the paper. It also includes the agent-under-test and adversarial-agent runners, with their orchestration logic and tool definitions. Every system, task, attack, guardrail, and judge prompt used for a reported outcome ships with its response parser and provider adapter. The local A2A adapter is included as code but did not enter the frozen manifest or the paper’s evidence. The frozen corpus lock, trial registry, raw transcripts, con-formance ledger, and analysis code complete the record. The lock records model strings, generation settings, policy hashes, fixture and scoring revisions, and prompts. The qualification record binds the analyzed archive to its generator revision; 

sensitivity.csv records the incomplete-outcome bounds, cluster influence, fallback distribution, and judge agreement reported here. These materials reproduce the experimental conditions, not the provider models themselves. Development notebooks do not enter the release record. The README gives commands to build and test the sys-tem, verify conformance, check the archive qualifications, and regenerate every reported table and figure offline without model credentials. Fresh model calls may differ, so rerunning providers is a replication of the procedure rather than a repro-duction of the reported numbers. The provider replay cache and a best-effort telemetry log are omitted for size; neither is read by the released analysis. The archived transcripts, tool traces, outcomes, judge ledgers, and derived paper outputs remain available. After deanonymization, we will preserve the artifact at a stable archival URL. 

## A Example Policies 

Record-scope. Narrowing a read by record ownership can hap-pen upstream or at the gateway, and a policy can name both. The gateway can push a condition down into the upstream query, so the out-of-scope records never leave the upstream, and it can apply the same condition as a filter on the response, which works against any backend. The example keys both to the caller’s team. 

> // Pushdown: narrow the listing upstream @id("issue_list_scoped") @transform("allow_with_scope_query") @field_group("summary") @cap_limit("100") permit (principal, action == Action::"list", resource is Issue) when { principal.group_ids.contains( resource.project) || principal.direct_report_ids.contains( resource.assignee) };

When the upstream cannot narrow the query itself, the gateway applies the same condition as a filter on the response. 

> // Gateway: keep only the lead’s team @id("issue_list_team") @transform("allow_with_filter_records") @field_group("summary") permit (principal, action == Action::"list", resource is Issue); @id("issue_list_team_keep") permit (principal, action == Action::"filter_record", resource is Issue) when { principal.group_ids.contains( resource.project) || principal.direct_report_ids.contains( resource.assignee) };

Filter-records is two rules (Appendix E). The single-decision operators are one rule each: a field strip names a @field_group , a defer names an @approver and a 

@defer_timeout .

Three concerns, two tiers. The next example combines authorization, exposure control, and semantic gating. The owner policy strips restricted fields and defers a Critical-issue update for approval. The agent policy adds a scoped, capped listing for this agent. Comments mark the two tiers. 

> // AGENT BUNDLE (agent builder): scope and cap the listing @id("issue_list") @transform("allow_with_scope_query") @field_group("summary") @cap_limit("100") permit (principal, action == Action::"list", resource is Issue);

16 // OWNER POLICY (data owner): retain approved fields @id("issue_read_triage") @transform("allow_with_field_strip") @field_group("summary") permit (principal, action in [Action::"get", Action::"list"], resource is Issue); // OWNER POLICY (data owner): a Critical update waits // for the on-call lead @id("issue_update_critical_defer") @transform("defer") @approver("on_call_lead") @defer_timeout("3600") permit (principal, action == Action::"update", resource is Issue) when { resource.assignee == principal.account_id && resource.priority == "Highest" }; 

Composition trace. The list rules give a concrete instance of the two-tier law. Suppose owner policy S permits the call and retains field group FS. Agent policy PA adds team predicate 

t, caps the response at 100, and retains FA. The owner-only plan is 

ρS = ( q, n, ∅),

ηS = ( true , FS, μpass ),

ΠS(κ) = ( permit , ρS, ηS).

With both tiers, 

ρS,A = ( q ∧ t, min (n, 100 ), ∅),

ηS,A = ( true , FS ∩ FA, μpass ),

ΠS,A(κ) = ( permit , ρS,A, ηS,A) ⪯r ΠS(κ).

The agent tier creates no permit. It adds a predicate, lowers the cap, and can only shrink the retained field set. The concrete page returned by the two queries may differ; Proposition 3 orders the plans, not those sampled pages. Across a list, a triage read, and a Critical-issue update, the gateway returns permit, permit, and defer. The owner supplies the strip and defer for every agent at the connector; this agent’s policy adds only the scope query, as Proposition 3 requires. Stateful aggregate gates remain production design context and do not appear in a prototype bundle. 

## B Pattern-Compliance Matrix 

Table 6 applies the six properties of §3 to selected systems and configurations from §9. These grades are our assessment of the pinned public documentation and artifacts. A partial mark covers conditional support, a narrower interpretation, or behavior not fully exercised in the cited artifact; a negative mark means we did not find the property there, not that no private or extended configuration can supply it. 

## C Composition Preconditions and Proof Detail 

Under O1–O5, §5.1 claims that fixed matched rules produce one policy plan and that another restriction cannot widen it. This appendix supplies the algebra behind those claims. Table 7 states the operator behavior needed to instantiate that algebra; Table 8 separately records what the released path implements or still must test. 

Ordered components and content normalization. Let i range over the ordered gate, request, and response components, and let Di contain their restriction operands from the matched owner and agent rules. The row keeper is φS ∧ φA, where each term is its tier’s Cedar authorization result; same-tier permit addition is not another restriction operand. Once DS

establishes owner eligibility, an ordered component starts at its no-added-restriction value ⊤i. Write its result as 

Mi(Di) = ⊤i ∧ ^

> r∈Di

r.

Table 7 gives the concrete conditions for those meets. Con-tent rules are different. Let Nμ(Dμ) sort applicable rewrites by a schema-pinned key, let full redaction supersede partial rewrites, and then apply the remaining rules in one fixed sequence with inert replacement text. Nμ is a deterministic normalizer, not a semantic meet over arbitrary strings. The for-mal results are conditional on these definitions; conformance determines whether a released path satisfies them. 

Proof of Proposition 1. For any permutation π of the stage operands, 

⊤i ∧ r1 ∧ · · · ∧ rn = ⊤i ∧ rπ(1) ∧ · · · ∧ rπ(n).

Commutativity and associativity give the equality, while idem-potence makes duplicates harmless. Nμ depends on a set of rules and a fixed sort key, so permuting the input listing does not change its normal form. With κ, S, PA, C, and the trusted-state snapshot fixed, the prescribed gate–request–response order therefore produces one Π. Fixed envelope sanitation covers the final content-dependent step. A formal aggregate gate reads one fixed log prefix; later defer resolution is not an input to this plan. Audit ordering and display labels are not part of Π. □

Proof of Proposition 2. Suppose a well-formed stage re-striction adds operand ri to stage i. Then 

Mi(Di ∪ { ri}) = Mi(Di) ∧ ri ⪯r Mi(Di).

Applying this inequality at every affected stage yields the plan order. The order is lifted over the gate: deny has no later-stage grant, equal defer plans compare their request components, and permit plans compare request and response components. The owner-eligibility premise excludes the one transition this argument does not cover: default deny to the first owner per-mit. Nor does it cover adding a same-tier Cedar permit. O4 requires absence safety for drops and a restrictive direction 17 Table 6: Reviewed systems at the cited versions (Y = yes, P = partial or conditional, N = no). The table compares enforcement properties, not overall system quality. The OBPE row describes the released HTTP artifact, so interoperability and external gating remain partial.                                                     

> System or configuration Agent-inaccessible Deterministic Interoperable Resource aware Boundary shaping External gating Envoy ext_proc with external policy [18] PPYPYPAgentCore Policy, base [2] YYPPNNAgentCore Policy with Dogwood temporal rules [4, 17] YYPPNNAgentCore Policy with model-based guardrails [3] YPPPPNProgent [35] YPPPNPCaMeL [13] PYPPNPPAuth [34] PPPPNP
> OBPE, released HTTP artifact YYPYYP

for clamps. A structural record identifier I may stay outside the variable capability only under the declaration and policy-approval obligation in §4. Pattern masking is not part of this inequality: canonical normalization makes its execution order-independent but does not order arbitrary output bytes. Only structural stripping and full redaction retain the value-absence claim; partial projections and pattern masks remain incompa-rable. □

## D What Static Analysis Can Establish 

Static analysis can find conflicts and dead rules, but it cannot decide whether a valid policy captures organizational intent, whether a pattern catches every secret, or what an agent may infer from data left visible. 

The Cedar core. Cedar Analysis compares typed permit-or-forbid policy sets and can find shadowed or impossible per-mits, forbid overrides, and complete denials [12, 19]; Zelkova earlier translated IAM policies into satisfiability modulo the-ories (SMT) [7]. These tools reason about the written Cedar policy, not OBPE annotations or owner intent. A deployment making an analysis-backed claim must pin the analyzer and its accepted expression fragment. Time must be supplied as typed context, and bounded entity slicing needs a validated dereference level [6]. 

Beyond the gate. An opaque model of shaping can conser-vatively flag possible exposure or writes, with false alarms. It cannot prove owner-agent containment: two policies may be gate-equivalent yet shape different fields. That proof would need symbolic semantics for the annotations and connector schema, plus a correspondence argument for the staged im-plementation. This is proposed work; Proposition 3 states the conditional law it would need to check. Runtime content and history mark another limit. Static anal-ysis cannot promise that pattern masking finds every value or that a temporal predicate will fire. Structural removal proves absence only from one response. Retained fields are delib-erate declassification only when policy explicitly designates their release [32]; projection alone does not show that they reveal nothing about the removed value. That stronger claim        

> human, customer service, customer LLM, customer human, internal service, internal LLM, internal human, MSP service, MSP LLM, MSP
> prompt-injection susceptibility →
> cross-tenant exposure  →
> least vulnerable most vulnerable

Figure 4: Product order for two principal-risk dimensions. Arrows point toward greater vulnerability; the shaded nodes are incomparable. Production implements the richer registry, while the released proxy uses a one-dimensional chain. requires relational noninterference [11]. 

Production orders. The release uses the sensitivity chain in §5; production independently orders prompt-injection sus-ceptibility and cross-tenant reach. Their product is a lattice in Denning’s sense [15]. Figure 4 shows why an LLM limited to one customer and a human managed-service-provider (MSP) account are incomparable. The release does not exercise this registry. Read and write orders also differ. A service may resist injected instructions yet accept model-produced writes. Write corruptibility is the order-dual of Biba integrity, just as the read order reverses Bell–LaPadula clearance [8, 9]; ℓw( f )

therefore cannot be inferred from ℓ( f ).

## E Released Policy and Schema Contract 

Each released rule uses Cedar for its permit-or-forbid decision; OBPE annotations select shaping but do not alter that decision. A forbid stops the exchange. On allow, the wrapper combines annotations from every applicable permit. A separate YAML connector schema supplies resource, field, and wire semantics; it is not a generated Cedar type schema. 18 Table 7: Preconditions for Propositions 1–2 and INV-SG. Each result holds only when the corresponding obligation is satisfied. 

Obligation Purpose Evidence or control Query joins use conjunction Preserves caller and policy filters Vertical refusal and query-join tests Pattern masks use canonical order Prevents rule-order dependence Golden fixture Mask placeholders are inert Prevents remasking Golden fixture Full redaction supersedes partial rewrites Fixes one content normal form, not a semantic meet Composition fixture Caps are enforced after fetch Backend cannot evade the cap Proxy invariant Row filters see unprojected records Projection cannot change predicates Proxy fetch contract Every retained structural ID is declared non-sensitive and policy-approved Keeps addressing metadata visible only under the theo-rem’s fixed frame Schema validation Drop is limited to absence-safe fields Unsafe omission becomes denial Analyzer check Clamp direction comes from the schema Defines the restrictive bound Schema validation Writes never inject or default fields Preserves write monotonicity Jira PATCH contract; runtime check Scope-query avoids write-shaped fields Fixes request-stage order Bundle validation Co-firing defer parameters normalize or fail closed Makes defer initiation independent of rule order Formal assumption; shipped bundles audited Authenticated resolver, complete snapshot, terminal deadline, and duplicate-dispatch fence Supports safe resumption after approval Production design; not released 

Table 8: Evidence boundary for O1–O5 and the owner ceiling. The formal results assume each condition; the remaining columns state what is implemented, tested, or outside the released artifact.                         

> Condition Formal role Released artifact Conformance Not released O1 identity/mediation All claims Bound identity; HTTP path Identity/path tests; released grid MCP; remote A2A O2–O3 fixed semantics Permutation invariance Staged path; sensitivity chain Stage/full-path tests; mutations Product-order registry O4 safe writes Write monotonicity Guard live; drop/clamp unreachable Guard full path; drop/clamp synthetic Broader write workflows O5 trusted decisions Defer/history Hold path; nonterminal in-memory transition Hold/no-dispatch tests Terminal timeout; durable, temporal, aggregate Owner ceiling Propositions 1–3 Two-tier staged path Tier attribution; mutation checks Production deployment

Table 9: Released OBPE annotation contract. Comma-separated values name entries in the connector schema.          

> Annotation Meaning
> @id Stable policy name used for lookup and audit.
> @transform Selects the wrapper decision or shaping operator.
> @field_group Names a response allowlist; matched groups meet by intersection.
> @cap_limit Positive collection cap; matched caps meet by minimum.
> @pattern_mask_fields ,
> @pattern_mask_rules
> Name fields to scan and schema-defined pattern categories.
> @write_guard_fields Names fields the agent may not originate; omis-sion must preserve stored state.
> @approver ,@defer_timeout Name the approval route and hold deadline.
> @reason Human-readable denial or deferral advice.

The transform vocabulary comprises allow , deny , defer ,and six allow_with_* forms for query scope, record filtering, field stripping, field and pattern masking, and write guarding. Across matched rules, the smallest positive cap wins. Record filtering also requires a filter_record permit carrying the per-record predicate. The engine trusts, rather than verifies, the schema’s omission contract, so released write-guard evi-dence is limited to the Jira partial-update path. The schema also defines field and write groups, mask meth-ods, pattern categories, and wire syntax. It permits dropping only absence-safe fields and clamping only in a declared restrictive direction. Neither shipped schema enables those operators; fixed envelope sanitation always runs. Engine construction rejects invalid Cedar and malformed or unresolved annotations. The release’s policy editor checks field groups, positive caps, and record-filter companions; re-lease tests add schema coverage, reachability, and the evi-dence checks in Appendix F. No general solver- fragment lint ships. The released bundles use only == , != , && , || , has ,and set .contains over strings and Booleans. Extending that fragment requires a fresh analysis qualification. The Jira and ServiceNow mappings were authored by hand from published interfaces. The release has no OpenAPI im-porter and claims neither recursive reference nor polymor-phism support. Conformance covers only the shipped HTTP mappings and mock backends described in §6. 

## F Benchmark Accounting and Scoring Detail 

Before model calls, the frozen registry names every condi-tion, task, and replicate. The journal preserves attempts and retries and requires one terminal record per trial. Each judg-ment binds the trial, blinded-input hash, and frozen judge specification; failures and disagreements remain separate. The accounting keeps denominators separate instead of silently filling missing records. Cells average their available replicates, primary contrasts pair tasks and resample scenario clusters, and the complete-block sensitivity retains only repli-cate indices present in both arms. Further checks assign un-known security outcomes in opposing worst-case directions, 19 omit each cluster in turn, and count which arm each cluster favors. All replay the archive without changing an outcome or calling a provider. Token tables likewise preserve provider buckets and distin-guish a missing receipt from a recorded zero. Missing receipts make adversary and harness spend lower bounds, which is why the qualification marks token accounting incomplete; none of the outcome calculations reads those receipts. The conformance ledger follows each reachable operator through its schema, plan, shaped exchange, backend effect, audit, and normalized content. Write guard therefore counts as evidence, whereas unreachable drop and clamp do not. Equal cluster weighting addresses a separate imbalance: 23 of 35 clusters contain one task, but the largest contains 12. 

## G Deferral Transport 

Deferral separates deciding to hold a call from deciding what happens later. Write g = defer (α, τ, C , χ), where α names the approval route, τ is the deadline, C is the approval predicate, and χ is an immutable snapshot of every policy-relevant re-quest component. The agent cannot read or write the resolver channel. While the call is held, the backend sees nothing. A production resolver records one of three terminal deci-sions over χ: approved, rejected, or expired. It authenticates the decision maker and checks policy authorization for route 

α; a decision arriving after τ loses to expiry. Replay protec-tion and an atomic state transition ensure that only the first terminal decision is accepted. Approval may release exactly the snapshot that was reviewed, not a rewritten call. Dispatch still needs an idempotency key or a backend transaction fence: a durable log position prevents two resolver decisions from winning, but by itself cannot prove exactly-once effects across a crash. These are safety conditions. Progress also needs a live resolver or a trusted timeout worker; the model does not guarantee that an approver responds. Production realizes this state machine with an agent-inaccessible durable log. One deferral_id binds the com-plete snapshot, predicate, deadline, bundle version, and termi-nal decision. The unimplemented aggregate gate in §4 would likewise read one committed prefix and retain its count, offset, and log-time window for replay. Because concurrent decisions can change that prefix, evaluation and commit must serialize for the relevant key. The released proxy demonstrates only the first transition. It hashes method, path, agent, bundle version, and shaped body into deferral_id , stores that partial snapshot, and returns pending. Query parameters, headers, and pre-fetched state are absent; timeout is not persisted as terminal; and a resume result never dispatches. The release therefore establishes hold and no-dispatch, not safe resumption, durable approval, or full INV-SG. 20