Title: Execution Divergence Graphs:Effective Discovery of Control-Flows from Execution Traces as Fuzzing Feedback

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.03396v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 01:05:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Execution Divergence Graphs: Effective Discovery of Control-Flows from Execution Traces as Fuzzing Feedback 

Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer 

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany 

Abstract. Fuzz testing is a popular approach to the security testing of proprietary software. Efficient testing strategies rely on execution feed-back to guide the input generation process, particularly when the basic blocks in the binary can be directly observed and instrumented. Un-fortunately, collecting such feedback is impossible in scenarios such as in-situ fuzzing of black-box devices and the fuzzing of obfuscated com-piled binaries. In this work, we discuss approaches to guide the fuzzer using feedback derived from a control-flow-graph-like (CFG-like) struc-ture constructed from runtime execution. We start by outlining a simple divergence-detection approach that iden-tifies unique execution traces, and then present an improved approach based on an Execution Divergence Graph (EDG). We implement both approaches and demonstrate that they outperform a baseline blind fuzzer. In addition, we discuss particular challenges, such as repeated code ex-ecution in loops, and show that the EDG-based approach handles them effectively. We then demonstrate that our approach enables effective fuzzing of a number of obfuscated targets, and compare its performance in scenarios where static instrumentation is impossible. While we focus on a scenario in which full instruction traces are directly observable by the attacker, our scheme can also be applied in scenarios with other feedback channels, such as power consumption. 

## 1 Introduction 

Fuzzing is an automated software-testing technology that works by injecting random inputs (called “fuzz” [1]) into a program to expose bugs, crashes, or security vulnerabilities. Unguided fuzzers generate inputs from a corpus [2, 3] or predefined-input rules [4] to explore simple programs. However, unguided fuzzers struggle to reach deeper code paths in complex programs, where serious vulnerabilities are often located. To address this issue, modern guided test ap-proaches [5–10] use coverage, which represents how many code paths are visited during testing, to guide the fuzzer. This coverage-guided fuzzing requires static instrumentation to generate feedback. Instrumentation, however, has several limitations. First, it requires access to the target’s source code or binary for successful code modification. Even when  

> arXiv:2607.03396v1 [cs.CR] 3 Jul 2026 2Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer

a binary is available, its author can use tools to obfuscate it, rendering instru-mentation ineffective. For instance, obfuscators such as Movfuscator [11] and Tigress [12] can hide all standard branch instructions. Without distinct control-flow instructions like branches, the concept of a basic block is lost, and the fuzzer cannot accurately map or track connections between basic blocks (edges). Con-sequently, the fuzzer cannot obtain the crucial control-flow information, such as which paths an input has visited, needed to guide its exploration. In this work, we present several approaches to address this issue, and show how to generate suitable feedback for fuzzing by analyzing target execution traces. Such traces could, for example, consist of a sequence of the executed instruction addresses without further annotation. Even without static analysis of the target binary, we show how to process such execution traces to detect ex-ecution of novel code segments, while maintaining computational and memory efficiency. While naive approaches to this problem simply store prior execution traces and compare them to new traces, we show that such approaches are par-ticularly unable to detect repeated execution of code segments, and thus vastly overestimate the novelty of inputs. To address this, we introduce the concept of Execution Divergence Graphs (EDGs), a CFG-like structure for tracking ob-served execution sequences and describing the target program. Using an EDG to track input executions allows valuable coverage feedback to be generated for standard fuzzers. In our experiments, we demonstrate that our approach achieves performance similar to classic instrumentation-guided fuzzing, without requiring explicit instrumentation of the target binary. Our contributions are as follows: 

– We demonstrate that the divergence between execution traces can guide a coverage-guided fuzzer. 

– We introduce a graph structure based on execution traces to improve the execution-divergence feedback given to the fuzzer. 

– We implement our approach and evaluate it on several real-world programs to demonstrate that our approach is applicable to standard fuzzing tasks. 

– We also demonstrate our approach on several obfuscated targets (where clas-sic instrumentation is impossible), and show that our approach can still guide the fuzzer to explore the obfuscated programs efficiently. 

– Our artifact can be found at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ED G-BBC4 .

## 2 Background 

2.1 Coverage-Guided Fuzzing 

The ultimate objective of a coverage-guided fuzzer is to generate inputs such that, by the end of a fuzzing campaign, every possible control-flow path has been traversed at least once. Coverage-guided fuzzers usually use instrumentation to extract the control flow of the target for a given input. Based on this feedback, Execution Divergence Graphs 3

they attempt to generate additional inputs that exercise different paths from those taken by previous inputs, thus maximizing code coverage. Coverage is often measured in the form of edge coverage [5]. The target binary is instrumented so that it emits an edge-coverage hash map for each input. This map expresses the transitions between basic blocks that occur at runtime in a condensed form. The fuzzer maintains a cumulative hash map to track all known edges and their frequencies of occurrence. Comparing the hash map of a single execution run (using one particular input) with the cumulative hash map allows the fuzzer to assess whether new edges were discovered or whether known edges were traversed more or less frequently. 

2.2 Guided Black-box Fuzzing 

Although coverage-guided fuzzing effectively finds bugs in programs that support post-instrumentation edge feedback, it is inapplicable in various scenarios, such as network and protocol fuzzing, where static instrumentation is not feasible. Therefore, black-box fuzzing that does not leverage the internal information of a program is widely applied in these scenarios. However, conventional black-box fuzzing approaches, such as mutation-based and generation-based fuzzing, are not sufficient in these scenarios. Thus, these approaches design their own feedback mechanism based on the externally ob-servable states such as responses from IoT devices, protocol states, and messages between network nodes [13–15] to guide black-box fuzzing. 

## 3 Novelty Detection from Execution Traces 

3.1 System Model 

We describe the components illustrated in Figure 1 of the system model. 

Black-box Target is a system or device that accepts input for execution. A major challenge arises when the binary is inaccessible. This prevents third-party testers from directly recovering the underlying code, which is a prerequisite for effective software testing, especially coverage-guided fuzzing. 

Observer is an external device (e.g., J-Trace Debugger or an oscilloscope) or software (e.g., GDB) that captures the raw signals from a black-box target. The observer decodes the raw signals into the execution traces , which record the time-series information flow during program execution. The data points vary by observer type: if the observer is a debugging tool, the trace records text indicating which instruction or function was executed at a specific timestamp. Alternatively, if the observer is a measurement device, such as an oscilloscope monitoring power signals, the time-series data consists of floating-point values representing power consumption. 

Execution Divergence Analysis Component is designed to identify dif-ferences between execution traces from a pair of program executions. It executes the Divergence Detection process to quantify the difference between two execu-tion traces ( T1 and T2), using an element-wise heuristic function H(T1, T 2) = v,4 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer Black-box target Observer Fuzzer Execution Divergence Analysis Execution Traces Raw Signals Feedback Input 

Fig. 1: System Overview which yields a difference vector v aligned in time with the traces. A divergence point is then designated at any timestamp s where the corresponding value vs

exceeds a predefined threshold τ (vs > τ ), indicating the time at which the ob-served divergence between the traces begins. The component then leverages the divergence results to create trace segments . If the trace segments are sequential instructions, we refer to these trace segments as code segments . Fuzzer uses the trace segments as feedback from the black-box target and generates inputs accordingly. 

The Fuzzing Loop. The pseudocode of the fuzzing loop is shown in Algo-rithm 1. The fuzzer first generates input i from its given corpus without feedback (line 2). The generated input i is then sent to the black-box target connected to the observer for processing (line 4). When the processing is complete, the observer obtains the trace information t for the execution divergence analysis module (line 5). Subsequently, the module returns the analysis result as feed-back to the fuzzer, which then generates the next input accordingly (line 6). If the given edge feedback is deemed interesting by the fuzzer, the input i is added to the corpus C.

Algorithm 1: Overall fuzzing loop with execution divergence feedback.                                

> Input: C: the seeded corpus for the fuzzer
> Data: T: previously observed unique traces; i: input; f: feedback provided by
> DivergenceAnalysis (.); t: the observed execution trace.
> 1T← ∅ ;
> 2i, C←F uzzer (∅,C); // Generate an initial input without feedback.
> 3while true do
> 4t←Observer (Blackbox (i));
> 5f, T←DivergenceAnalysis (t, T);
> 6i, C←F uzzer (f, C); Execution Divergence Graphs 5

3.2 Research Questions – RQ1. Given a new execution trace and all previous traces, how can we efficiently determine whether the new execution trace follows a previously known code path (and identify the matching old trace(s))? 

– RQ2. Given a new execution trace and all previous traces, how can we efficiently determine whether the new trace contains novel code segments or novel transitions? 

– RQ3. How can novel code and transition discovery be used as feedback for the fuzzer? 

3.3 Simple Divergence Approach 

We start by addressing RQ1 . The simplest approach for detecting novelty in a new execution trace relies on a divergence-detection function that compares the new trace against all previously recorded traces (line 2 in Alg 2). We first calculate the vector v using the heuristic function H(.) (line 3) and check at which index the value vs exceeds the threshold τ . This indicates that two traces start to diverge at s, and the comparison then continues with the next T (line 6-7 and line 2). When the new trace t has been compared with all traces in T, we add the trace into the trace set T (line 9). Lastly, we return the 

t and T to the Fuzzer (line 10). In contrast, if there is no value higher than threshold, the new trace t is a duplicate and we stop further comparison with the rest of the traces in T. The matching trace T and the trace set T are then returned to the fuzzer (line 8). This method deems a new execution trace to be novel only if it diverges from every single recorded trace. Although simple to implement, this technique suffers from two performance-related drawbacks: Recomparing Shared Traces and the False Novelty from Repeating Code Segments .

The Recomparing Shared Traces issue arises because the method redun-dantly checks common code segments shared among multiple recorded execution traces. Assuming that all n recorded traces share the same code segment ABCDE in the beginning, the approach has to perform at least n × 5 identical comparisons. This excessive and redundant computation drastically degrades performance, particularly as the number of the recorded traces grows. 

False Novelty from Repeating Code Segments arises when code seg-ments repeated through loop iterations are mistakenly classified as novel. For instance, a program contains a code segment C that checks whether a byte is legal or not. The program uses this code segment to validate input bytes, which may vary in number depending on input length. When an input length is 3 bytes, the code segment will repeat 3 times, creating execution trace CCC . If a new in-put is 5 bytes long, the new execution trace will become CCCCC . By comparing the two execution traces CCC and CCCCC , the approach concludes that the trace 

CCCCC is novel. However, this code segment has already been discovered. 6 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer 

Algorithm 2: Pseudocode of simple Divergence Analysis Approach.                                          

> Input: T: set of unique traces; t: the new trace; τthreshold for trace segment comparison
> Result: Tand t
> Data: duplicate : a boolean value to denote a new trace is identical to one of the traces in T.
> 1duplicate ←false ;
> 2for Tin Tdo
> 3v←H(T, t );
> 4for vsin v// Check if two traces differ
> 5do
> 6if vs> τ then
> 7break;
> 8return t, T
> 9T←TS{t}
> 10 return t, T

3.4 Execution Divergence Graph-based Approach 

To address RQ2 and overcome the significant performance impact caused by the redundant recomparison of shared traces, we now introduce the Execution Diver-gence Graph ( EDG )-based approach. The EDG data structure enables merging identical code segments shared across different execution traces. Unlike the base-line approach, which stores each trace identified as divergent, the EDG approach merges common, identical code segments between new and existing traces before storage. For instance, given a new trace ABCDEFG and an existing trace ABCDECCA 

within the EDG, the divergence detection function first identifies the shared code segments ABCDE . The graph then factors out this shared segment and connects it to the remaining segments, FG and CCA . In this example, the newly created shared code segment ABCDE and the two remaining segments are novel. Even-tually, even if the EDG contains n different execution traces sharing the code segment ABCDE , any new incoming trace only needs to compare with that merged segment once, drastically improving efficiency. 

Repeated Code Segments. However, the simple EDG cannot solve the false-novelty problems caused by repeating code segments. Consider a simple EDG initialized with a stored execution trace T1=ABAB . When a new incoming execution trace Tnew =ABABAB arrives, it triggers the graph to create a new trace 

T2=AB , connected to T1. The graph then marks T2 as a novel code segment. Furthermore, when there is a new execution trace Tnew =ABABABAB , the graph iteratively creates another code segment T3=AB , connected to T2 and again marks 

T3 as novel. In fact, T2 and T3 are the repeating code segments AB , demonstrating the simple EDG’s failure to recognize repeating code segments. 

Backlinking in EDG. Backlinking is a mechanism we introduced to resolve the false positives from repeating code segments in the graph. This process is initiated immediately when the divergence detection function identifies a diver-Execution Divergence Graphs 7

gence between the incoming trace and the stored trace, signaling a candidate new segment. Backlinking then broadcasts the candidate segments across the entire graph and searches the entire graph for any existing identical code segments. Following the previous example, when the graph obtains T2=AB , backlinking broadcasts T2 and discovers that there is an exact match with its parent trace 

T1=ABAB , leading to its merger with the identical part in T1 and establishing a self-loop connection . After refactoring the identical part, T1 is reduced to AB 

and broadcast by backlinking. Another exact match then occurs between T1 and 

T2, causing T1 to be merged once again with T2. With backlinking, no matter how many times a new incoming trace repeats AB , the EDG always considers it a non-novel code segment. 

Execution Divergence Analysis with EDG. The new trace t is first used to traverse EDG T, which stores all previously observed traces (line 1 in Alg 3). After traversal, EDG returns the edges f traversed by the new trace and the unmatched residual part t′. If the trace has a perfect match in the graph, then t′ is empty, and the traversed edges f are returned. Conversely, when t′ is not empty, the EDG triggers backlink (.) to integrate t′ (line 3). Since the graph is updated after backlink (.), and some nodes and edges change, we traverse the trace t again to obtain the latest traversed edges (line 4). More details about traverse (.) and 

backlink (.) are provided in Section 4.3 and Section 4.4, respectively. 

Algorithm 3: Pseudocode of EDG -based Execution Divergence Anal-ysis.                             

> Input: T: EDG, containing unique traces observed so far; tis a new trace.
> Result: f: the traversed edges in EDG.
> Data: t′: the unmatched part of the new trace tafter the first traverse (.).
> 1(t′, f )←traverse (T, t );
> 2if t′is not ∅then
> 3T←backlink (T, t ′);
> 4(∅, f )←traverse (T, t );
> 5return f, T

3.5 Generating Feedback from Execution Divergence Analysis Overview. In this section, we address RQ3 and discuss how, based on an EDG, we can guide an AFL fuzzer by execution traces while fuzzing an unin-strumented target . We first explain how AFL’s hit-count bucket mechanism de-termines whether feedback is interesting and how simple-div and EDG interact with AFL through feedback. We use five execution traces shown in Table 1 as examples to describe how simple-div and EDG work together with AFL. 

AFL’s Hit-Count Bucket. AFL does not preserve the exact execution count of each edge. Instead, it maps the count into a small set of hit-count buckets, such as 1, 2, 3–4, 5–8, 9–16, 17–32, 33–128, and 129 or more. This 8 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer 

Table 1: An example demonstrates how simple-div and EDG convert execution traces into AFL feedback.                              

> Trace simple-div EDG
> Feedback Interesting Segments Feedback Interesting
> SS:1 Yes S∅:1 Yes
> SAB SAB :1 Yes S;AB S→AB :1 Yes
> SABABABAB SABABABAB :1 Yes S;AB S→AB :1, AB →AB :3, Yes
> SABABABAB SABABABAB :1 No S;AB S→AB :1, AB →AB :3, No
> SABABABABAB SABABABABAB :1 Yes S;AB S→AB :1, AB →AB :4 No

coarse-grained encoding reduces noise from minor count fluctuations while still capturing meaningful execution changes. Therefore, an input is considered in-teresting not only when it reaches a previously unseen edge, but also when it drives an already known edge into a bucket that has not been observed before. 

Feedback from simple-div . For each trace, simple-div generates one edge feedback for AFL, always with a hit count of 1. Each individual trace is mapped to a different edge, while identical traces are mapped to the same edge. In our example, four edges are reported to AFL, corresponding to S, SAB , SABABABAB ,and SABABABABAB . As the second occurrence of SABABABAB is identical to the first occurrence, it is reported as the same edge, again with a hit count of 1. Thus, AFL does not consider it interesting. In summary, AFL considers all distinct traces in this example interesting because they are reported as previously unseen edges, whereas the repeated occurrence of SABABABAB is ignored because it is reported in the same way as before. Based on the five example traces, we identify two explicit drawbacks of simple-div : first, every divergent trace is treated similarly because all divergent traces are placed in bucket 1; second, the repeated segment 

AB causes repeated traces to be treated as novel simply because it appears more times. 

Feedback from EDG Analysis. Unlike simple-div , EDG converts traces into a graph representation. In this graph, links between nodes (i.e., transitions between code blocks) are used as feedback. This is very similar to standard AFL feedback based on links in a CFG. The first trace is a special case for EDG 

because the graph contains only a single node ( S). The feedback reported to AFL is represented as a special edge 0 with a count of 1. When the second trace, 

SAB , arrives, our EDG analysis adds the segment AB and the corresponding link between S and AB into the EDG. This link is then reported to AFL with a count of 1. The EDG analysis does not find any new code segment in the third trace, 

SABABABAB , but it finds that the transition AB →AB repeats three times in the trace. Since the transition AB →AB is new and occurs three times in the execution, AFL places the new transition in bucket 3-4 and marks it as interesting. The fourth trace is identical to the third trace and is therefore not interesting. For the fifth trace, our EDG analysis finds that the transition AB →AB repeats four times, which is different from before. However, it remains in bucket 3-4 because Execution Divergence Graphs 9

the number of repetitions does not exceed the bucket cap of 4 in this case. Therefore, the fifth trace is not considered interesting by AFL. In summary, this example demonstrates that our EDG analysis provides more informative feedback than the simple divergence detection approach. 

## 4 Detailed Design of Execution Divergence Graphs 

4.1 Definition 

Unlike a control-flow graph, which captures all possible connections between basic blocks based on complete information available from an instrumented bi-nary, the EDG is constructed solely from execution traces collected at runtime from a black-box target. It organizes these traces according to their observed di-vergences, enabling third-party testers to analyze the target’s behavior without access to its internal code structure. Because the EDG depends entirely on ob-served executions, it cannot reveal execution paths that never occur at runtime, even though such paths may be represented in a traditional control-flow graph. However, the EDG can capture concrete execution paths that static CFG recov-ery may miss, such as indirect function calls whose callees cannot be determined at compile time. Consequently, the EDG serves as a dynamic representation of a control-flow graph , capturing the behavior that actually manifests during execution. 

4.2 Graph Components 

In the EDG, nodes represent execution segments discovered during the target’s runtime (except for the root node), and directed edges connect these segments to describe transitions between execution segments. Because the edges are directed, an edge from Node X to Node Y implies a parent–child relation, meaning that during execution the target executes X first and then proceeds to Y. As shown in step (a) of Figure 2, there are three non-root nodes corresponding to the execution segments A, BBZ , and CZ . Starting from the root, the only outgoing edge leads to Node A, indicating that A is the first execution segment observed at runtime. Node A has two outgoing edges to its children, Node BBZ and Node 

CZ , illustrating the two possible execution paths that follow segment A. Both 

BBZ and CZ have no outgoing edges, meaning they represent terminal segments. By following the edges starting from the root, the full set of execution paths occurring during runtime can be reconstructed. 

4.3 Match First Traversal 

Our Match First Traversal algorithm defines how an incoming trace traverses the simple EDG. At each step, the algorithm evaluates all adjacent nodes to determine the next node to explore based on the length of the common prefix. For example, when the trace ACBBBDZ is processed by the EDG (Figure 2, step 10 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer CZ BBZ AACBBBDZ b. Full Match C Z BBZ ACBBBDZ c. Partial Match AACBBBDZ CZ BBZ a. Enter Root BBZ ABBBDZ CZd. Update Graph Simple Execution Divergence Graph (EDG) Backlinking EDG e. Broadcast C BBZ ABBBDZ CZf. Broadcast BBBDZ BBZ ABBBDZ CZZg. Broadcast Z BB ABDZ CZh. Broadcast BDZ BB ABDZ CZBi. Broadcast B BADZ CZj. Final BADZ CZ

Fig. 2: This illustration contrasts how the Simple and Backlinking Execution Divergence Graphs (EDGs) integrate the new trace ACBBBDZ : when a partial match is found (node CZ , step c), the Simple EDG immediately appends the remainder of the trace (step d), while the Backlinking EDG broadcasts all new segments ( C, Z, BBBDZ ) across the graph to check for identical segments. The orange node is the root, dark green nodes signify a full match, half dark-green/red nodes (e.g., C/Z ) denote a partial match, and blue nodes represent newly created nodes; the light green nodes in Backlinking EDG indicate the node is currently broadcast. a), it begins at the root and matches Node A. Because Node A fully matches the first part of the trace, this is a full match, meaning that Node A becomes the next node to be explored and the graph remains unchanged (step b). After the match, the algorithm consumes A from the trace, resulting in CBBBDZ , and proceeds to the next step. In step c, the algorithm finds that CBBBDZ and Node 

CZ share a common C but diverge afterward. This partial match causes the EDG to factor out the shared segment C as a new node, with the remaining segment 

Z becoming another new node connected as a child of C. The unmatched rest of the trace, BBBDZ , also diverges after C and is therefore added as another child of the new node C (step d). 

4.4 Backlinking Candidates 

While the simple EDG directly updates the graph by adding the discovered new segments C, Z, and BBBDZ (step d in Figure 2), the Backlinking EDG instead broadcasts these new segments across the entire graph for additional matching. As shown in step e, the graph first broadcasts Node C but finds no match. It then continues with Node BBBDZ and discovers that Nodes BBZ and BBBDZ share the common trace segment BB (step f). The graph then factors out this shared segment as a new node BB , which is connected to two new nodes corresponding to the divergent parts BDZ and Z. Node Z, which originates from Node BBZ ,is broadcast next, as shown in step g, where the graph finds that it perfectly Execution Divergence Graphs 11 

matches another Node Z. These two Nodes Z are then merged into a single Node 

Z, which inherits the parents BB and Node C (step h). After broadcasting Node 

Z, the graph broadcasts Node BDZ and discovers that Node BDZ and Node BB 

share the common trace segment B. Consequently, a new Node B is created and connected to two new children, Node DZ and Node B. The graph then applies backlinking to the new child Node B in step i and finds a node with an identical trace segment, causing the two Nodes B to merge. Because these two Nodes B

were connected by an edge before merging, the graph creates a self-loop edge for the new Node B. Once step i is completed, three nodes remain in the broadcast queue: B, Z, and DZ ; however, none of them matches any other node in the graph, so no further updates occur and the backlinking process ends (step j). Comparing the results of the simple EDG (step d) and the backlinking EDG (step j), the backlinking version yields fewer redundant trace segments in the final graph. 

## 5 Case Study 

In this section, we first use a simple password checker program as a demonstra-tion of how different levels of feedback affect fuzzing performance. We show how the simple divergence approach easily generates a high number of false positives when the password checker includes an input validator. Hence, we introduce the Execution Divergence Graph to solve this problem. Lastly, we fuzz obfuscated password checkers to demonstrate how obfuscation affects the feedback available to the fuzzer. 

5.1 Fuzzing Scenarios 

We consider four main fuzzing scenarios: blind , perfect , simple-div , and EDG .In the blind scenario, the fuzzer receives no feedback from the target. This is the baseline scenario when the target cannot be instrumented. The perfect sce-nario provides ground-truth edge information to the fuzzer. We use this setting as a reference for fuzzer performance under ideal conditions. The simple-div 

(Section 3.3) and EDG (Section 3.4) scenarios provide feedback derived from execution traces. For a fuzzer guided by the simple-div mechanism, every trace that has not been seen before is treated as a new discovery. In contrast, in the 

EDG -based approach, all collected traces are used to reconstruct a graph that provides more fine-grained trace information, indicating which segments of an incoming trace have already been observed and which are new. 

5.2 Password Checker 

We implement a password checker with secret badfuzz! (Alg 4) and run an AFL fuzzer across the four scenarios. Under each scenario, we repeat the fuzzing process five times. Each fuzzing run lasts 4 hours because the fuzzer under the 

perfect scenario already recovers the password. As Figure 3a shows, the fuzzer under the perfect scenario discovers the highest number of unique edges (22). 12 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000    

> time (seconds)
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> 20
> 22
> unique edges
> blind perfect simple-div edg

(a) Password checker (Case 1). 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000    

> time (seconds)
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> 20
> 22
> 24
> 26
> unique edges
> blind perfect simple-div edg

(b) Password checker with input validator (Case 2). 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000    

> time (seconds)
> 0
> 8
> 16
> 24
> 32
> 40
> 48
> 56
> 64
> mean input length (bytes)
> blind perfect simple-div edg

(c) Average length of inputs over time (Case 2). 

Fig. 3: Figure 3a and Figure 3b demonstrate the number of unique edges dis-covered over time for the two password checkers across four fuzzing scenar-ios for 4 hours: blind , perfect , simple-div , and EDG . The feedback provided by the divergence-detection-based approaches, simple-div and EDG , can effectively guide the fuzzer, since both outperform the blind scenario, in which the fuzzer re-ceives no feedback (Figure 3a). However, simple-div performs poorly in Figure 3b because of repeated basic blocks introduced by the input validator, namely the loop that checks input bytes one by one for null values. These repeated basic blocks are mistakenly treated as divergences and mislead the fuzzer into generat-ing longer inputs instead of focusing on interesting bytes related to the password (Figure 3c). Execution Divergence Graphs 13 

Algorithm 4: Pseudo code of the password checker.                                     

> Data: data ptr : input buffer
> 1if data ptr [0] = ’b’ then
> 2if data ptr [1] = ’a’ then
> 3if data ptr [2] = ’d’ then
> 4if data ptr [3] = ’f’ then
> 5if data ptr [4] = ’u’ then
> 6if data ptr [5] = ’z’ then
> 7if data ptr [6] = ’z’ then
> 8if data ptr [7] = ’!’ then
> 9accept password ;
> 10 return 0;

The fuzzer without feedback (the blind scenario) performs the worst among all scenarios and finds only 12 edges in the best case. When the fuzzer uses trace segments as feedback ( simple-div and EDG ), it performs better than in the no-feedback setting. Since all execution paths are related to the characters in the password, the new trace segments found by simple-div and EDG are identical. Hence, the fuzzer shows comparable performance under these two scenarios. 

5.3 Password Checker + Input Validator 

However, as we discussed in Section 3.3, the simple divergence approach only detects whether the full trace has been observed before. Any small difference, e.g., if a code segment repeats more times than in previous traces, causes the simple divergence approach to classify the trace as novel, which is a false positive. To demonstrate this issue, we add an input validator to the previous target. The input validator processes the input string and checks each byte for a null value. When the program encounters a null value, it terminates immediately. Due to this construction, the number of iterations through the input validator depends on the content and length of the input. This causes traces generated from different input lengths to be regarded as novel by the simple divergence approach. As expected, we observe a substantial performance impact in the 

simple-div scenario, as Figure 3b shows: the fuzzer discovers only a very limited number of unique edges. In addition, simple-div leads the fuzzer to generate longer inputs than in other scenarios (Figure 3c) because of these input-length-related false positives. As a result, the password checker takes more time to process long inputs than short ones. Because of the longer processing time, the fuzzer generates fewer inputs during a fixed fuzzing duration ( EDG : 1.6M inputs vs simple-div : 1.2M inputs). The EDG scenario, on the other hand, is still able to reach deeper parts of the program. These results show that the backlinking mechanism in EDG (Section 3.4) provides a substantial improvement in fuzzing performance. 14 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer  

> (a) The CFG without obfuscation. (b) The CFG with obfuscation.

Fig. 4: The comparison between the CFGs of the normal and the obfuscated bi-naries. The binary is the password checker mentioned in Section 5.2. Before the obfuscation, the CFG shows explicit links between basic blocks and the true/-false paths (Figure 4a). The obfuscation turns the branch instructions into jump instructions, whose destination addresses can only be obtained after execution. Therefore, these jump addresses cannot be found by static instrumentation tool before the program starts ( JMP RAX in Figure 4b). 

5.4 Obfuscated Password Checker 

We discuss the obfuscated case in which EDG is a suitable replacement for conventional edge feedback for an AFL fuzzer, particularly in cases where static instrumentation is infeasible. 

Password Checker’s CFG. The CFG of the non-obfuscated password checker is shown in Figure 4a. The figure shows that the password checker has a nested-if structure, in which the execution of each basic block depends on the execution of the previous one, except for the entry and exit points. 

Control-flow Flattening. Control-flow flattening [16] is one of the most common techniques for obfuscating binaries. It transforms common control struc-tures, such as if statements, loops, and function calls, into a central dispatcher that determines which basic block to execute based on its current state. Through Execution Divergence Graphs 15 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000   

> time (seconds)
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> 20
> unique edges
> blind perfect edg

(a) Obfuscated with Control-flow Flatten. 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000   

> time (seconds)
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> unique edges
> blind edg

(b) Obfuscated with Indirect Jump. 

Fig. 5: The number of edges discovered while fuzzing the password checker under two different obfuscation schemes is shown for control-flow flattening (Figure 5a) and indirect jumps (Figure 5b). We obtain these edge counts from the non-obfuscated binary: we first fuzz the obfuscated binaries and then trace the exe-cution of the non-obfuscated binary using the inputs generated during fuzzing. Because both obfuscation schemes significantly modify the original CFG, we ob-serve degraded fuzzing performance compared with Figure 3a and Figure 3b. However, EDG and perfect still outperform the blind fuzzer in the control-flow-flattening case. In contrast, perfect no longer works in the indirect-jump case because the control-flow targets are resolved only during execution and can-not be determined at compile time. In this case, the perfect fuzzer is effectively reduced to a blind fuzzer. Given access to runtime execution traces, EDG , in con-trast, can still guide the fuzzer by identifying divergences between executions. control-flow flattening, the password checker’s nested-if structure is completely flattened and transformed into multiple cases within a switch structure. For example, when the non-obfuscated password checker processes the input bad , it directly traverses the first if statement ( data ptr[0] == ’b’ ) up to the third one ( data ptr[2] == ’d’ ). In contrast, the control-flow-flattened version first enters the dispatcher and is directed to the case corresponding to data ptr[0] == ’b’ . The program then updates the dispatcher’s state and returns to the dispatcher again. Based on the updated state, the dispatcher transfers execu-tion to the next case, data ptr[1] == ’a’ . This example shows that additional dispatcher blocks are introduced into the obfuscated binary. These extra blocks complicate fuzzing and therefore degrade performance in the 4-hour fuzzing ex-periment (Figure 5a) compared with the non-obfuscated binary (Figure 3b). The mean number of discovered unique edges decreases from 24.75 to 18 for perfect 

and to 19 for EDG . With longer fuzzing time, the fuzzer can still recover the whole password, since it can still obtain edge feedback from the instrumented binary. 

Indirect Jump. To make the code more obfuscated and harder to instru-ment automatically, the obfuscator leverages indirect jump [17] to replace branch instructions. Instead of transferring execution to an explicit destination (e.g., the address of a basic block), an indirect jump computes the destination at runtime, typically from a register or a memory slot. As a result, the successor basic block is no longer explicit in the instruction itself, which obscures the control-flow graph. In practice, the obfuscator first splits the original code into multiple ba-16 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer 

sic blocks, assigns each block a corresponding entry in a jump table, and then uses a state variable to select the next target dynamically. Because the branch target is resolved only during execution, analysis and static instrumentation tools have a harder time recovering the original execution order and accurately identi-fying branch boundaries. Without instrumentation, the original coverage-guided fuzzer becomes blind, since it cannot obtain any edge feedback during fuzzing. However, EDG can still guide the fuzzer because it detects changes in execution by comparing traces at runtime. Figure 5b demonstrates that the fuzzer guided by EDG feedback reaches deeper parts of the program than the unguided fuzzer. 

## 6 Evaluation 

In this section, we first evaluate how efficiently our divergence-detection-based approaches can guide the fuzzer when testing non-obfuscated binaries (Sec-tion 6.2). Next, we obfuscate some binaries to hide their control flow in a jump table, which cannot be statically instrumented. We then evaluate whether our approaches can still provide edge feedback that enables the fuzzer to test the obfuscated binaries (Section 6.3). 

6.1 Settings Fuzzer. We use LibAFL [6] for fuzzing our non-obfuscated and obfuscated bi-naries. The number of edges in EDGE MAP is 262,144, which defines the maximum number of edges that can have their own unique IDs. If a binary has more than 262,144 edges, some edges will share the same ID. In terms of feedback, we use 

MaxMapPow2Feedback to enable hit-count buckets. We choose PowerSchedule [18] from the default schedulers, since the scheduler prioritizes inputs that trigger uncommon edges. Hence, the scheduler encourages the fuzzer to explore more untouched code in the binaries. 

Instruction Tracing. We leverage DynamoRIO [19] to trace instructions during runtime and store the traced instructions in shared memory, where our divergence-detection-based approaches can access them. 

Obfuscation. Tigress [12] is a source-to-source obfuscator that provides var-ious obfuscation options for researchers. We use it to convert C code into obfus-cated code and compile the result with GCC. 

Scenarios. As in Section 5.1, we evaluate three fuzzing scenarios: blind ,

perfect , and EDG . In Section 6.2, we use the blind scenario as the worst-case set-ting, in which the fuzzer receives no internal feedback. In Section 6.3, the blind 

scenario represents the case in which static instrumentation fails because of the indirect-jump implementation in the obfuscated binaries. We evaluate the perfect 

scenario only in Section 6.2, because the fuzzer cannot access basic-block infor-mation without static instrumentation. Hence, in Section 6.3, it is replaced by the blind scenario. The EDG scenario is our divergence-detection-based fuzzing setting, which has no false-positive problem compared to the simple-div approach (Section 5.3). Execution Divergence Graphs 17 0 20000 40000 60000 80000   

> time (seconds)
> 40
> 80
> 120
> 160
> 200
> 240
> 280
> unique edges
> blind perfect edg

(a) Results for minmea. 0 20000 40000 60000 80000    

> time (seconds)
> 150
> 300
> 450
> 600
> 750
> 900
> 1050
> 1200
> 1350
> 1500
> unique edges
> blind perfect edg

(b) Results for libpng. 

Fig. 6: Fuzzing results after 24 hours for fuzzers under three scenarios blind , per-fect , and EDG . The dashed line represents the mean number of discovered edges across five fuzzing runs, while the other two solid lines represent the maximum and minimum values, respectively. The results demonstrate that the divergence-detection-based approach ( EDG ) achieves performance comparable to that of the fuzzer with ground-truth edge feedback ( perfect ). More details are provided in Sec. 6.2. 

6.2 Guide Fuzzer with Instruction Trace Divergences 

We select two open-source libraries, minmea [20] and libpng [21], to test whether execution divergences in these programs can guide the fuzzer. Each fuzzing run lasts 24 hours, and each scenario is repeated five times. The results for the number of discovered unique edges over time are shown in Figure 6. 

minmea. minmea is a GPS parser that supports multiple sentence formats in the NMEA 0183 standard [22]. It is specifically designed for embedded systems because it is implemented in ISO C99 and has no dynamic memory allocation. After the fuzzing experiment, we find that our EDG -based fuzzing outperforms the other scenarios. EDG discovers 224.4 edges on average, whereas perfect and 

blind discover 176.6, and 155.6 edges, respectively (Figure 6a). The main reason 

EDG discovers more edges than perfect is that EDG generates inputs that cause segmentation faults (157 inputs). These inputs trigger system calls in the OS for crash handling, and thus the basic-block transitions within those system calls are recorded among the discovered edges. 

libpng. Libpng is a widely used PNG parser library. We use Libpng version 1.6.37 provided in LibAFL’s fuzzing example. The fuzzing result shows a sim-ilar outcome to minmea (Figure 6b): EDG -assisted fuzzing reaches the highest average number of edges (1509.6) among all scenarios. The remaining scenarios, from second high to low, are perfect (1473.8) and blind (1227.4). In addition, 

EDG also generates inputs (140) that cause segmentation faults. In summary, we show that the fuzzer can leverage execution divergences to guide fuzzing and performs comparably to a fuzzer with full edge feedback. Whether these inputs reveal genuine bugs or exception-handling deficiencies in the test programs remains an open question for future work. 18 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer 0 10000 20000 30000 40000  

> time (seconds)
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 140
> 160
> 180
> 200
> unique edges
> blind edg

(a) Obfuscated minmea. 0 10000 20000 30000 40000   

> time (seconds)
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 140
> 160
> 180
> 200
> 220
> 240
> unique edges
> blind edg

(b) Obfuscated Lz4. 

Fig. 7: Results of fuzzing real-world binaries obfuscated with indirect jumps after 12 hours. Since both binaries use indirect jumps to hide control flow, the perfect 

setting effectively reduces to the blind setting. Without feedback, blind performs worse than EDG , which can still guide the black-box fuzzer when static instru-mentation is impossible. More details are provided in Section 6.3. 

6.3 Fuzzing Indirect-Jump Binary 

We investigate whether our EDG -based fuzzing can help the fuzzer test obfus-cated binaries whose basic-block addresses are hidden through a jump table. Since the jump targets are resolved only during execution, static instrumenta-tion cannot determine these addresses in the obfuscated binaries. As a result, the perfect setting effectively reduces to blind fuzzing. Because simple-div causes memory-exhaustion problems when fuzzing obfuscated binaries as well, we fo-cus only on EDG , our optimized divergence-detection-based approach, in this section. Note that the number of discovered unique edges is measured from the 

non-obfuscated version of the binary. We reuse the inputs generated while fuzzing the obfuscated binaries, replay them on the non-obfuscated binaries, and trace the edges. For each obfuscated program, we run fuzzing under the EDG and 

blind scenarios for 12 hours and repeat each scenario three times. 

Obfuscated Minmea. As Figure 7a demonstrates, EDG overall performs better than blind in terms of the number of unique edges discovered in the non-obfuscated minmea binary (171.67 vs 155). Neither scenario triggers any segmentation fault observed in Section 6.2. 

Obfuscated lz4. lz4 [23] is a well-known compression algorithm and is widely shipped in many operating systems. After the fuzzing evaluation, EDG 

still performs better than blind (228 vs 214.33, Figure 7b), even though the blind fuzzer achieves 20% higher throughput. However, EDG in the worst case performs as poorly as the worst-case blind scenario: only 213 unique edges are discovered. As a result, we conclude that EDG can help black-box fuzzing when static instrumentation is impossible. 

## 7 Discussion 

Anti-Fuzzing Protected Binary. Anti-Fuzzing approaches [24,25] install fake paths in a binary to mislead coverage-guided fuzzers into exploring traps, which Execution Divergence Graphs 19 

waste the fuzzers’ time and computational resources. Since these fake paths are input-sensitive, even minor input mutations made by the fuzzers can easily trigger new edges along these fake paths. The fuzzers regard these edges as interesting and therefore spend more effort exploring the fake parts of the binary. Unfortunately, an EDG cannot effectively mitigate fake paths either because these fake paths can create various execution paths during runtime, which in turn create divergences that also mislead EDG .

Dynamic JIT Obfuscation. Some advanced obfuscation techniques [12,26] leverage JIT compilation to generate and obfuscate machine code at runtime. Under these techniques, the same function may produce different machine code each time it is invoked during execution. Because EDG cannot analyze the se-mantics of dynamically generated machine code, it treats all dynamically gener-ated code originating from the same function as separate execution instances. As a result, EDG produces a large amount of false-positive feedback for the fuzzer. 

EDG vs Dynamic Instrumentation. Although dynamic instrumentation tools like DynamoRIO [19] can discover the basic blocks hidden in a jump table by resolving the memory address during runtime, directly using such tools to provide edge feedback for the fuzzer cannot solve fuzzing scenarios where an obfuscated binary contains millions of bogus basic blocks that are always ex-ecuted. When these bogus basic blocks are executed, DynamoRIO generates a huge number of edges as feedback, thereby overwhelming the fuzzer’s edge map. In contrast, EDG only generates edge feedback when meaningful execution-trace differences appear. We conclude that EDG can assist fuzzing based on dynamic instrumentation when testing obfuscated binaries that leverage jump tables to hide basic blocks and contain an extremely large number of bogus basic blocks. 

EDG with other types of execution traces. EDG can also be applied to non-instruction traces if the analyst has a robust model for detecting their divergences. For instance, the analyst can collect power traces from IoT devices to train a divergence-detection model and use the model together with EDG to generate edge feedback for guiding a fuzzer. 

## 8 Related Work 

Non-instrumented fuzzing treats the target largely as a black box and relies on input structure and externally observable states rather than compiler-inserted coverage instrumentation. Grammar-based fuzzing leverages the input structure of a target to mutate inputs without direct instrumentation. Havrikov et al. [27] propose systematic coverage of grammar productions via k -paths. This approach benefits non-instrumented fuzzing because it improves the quality and diversity of generated inputs. Olsthoorn et al. [28] combine search-based testing with grammar-based fuzzing to generate highly structured inputs. EDG can assist grammar fuzzers by providing additional execution-level information about a non-instrumented target. Several prior works use externally observable states to guide fuzzing. Dis-tFuzz [14] uses inter-node messages as feedback for black-box fuzzing without 20 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer 

source instrumentation. Similarly, Snipuzz [29] infers message snippets from IoT responses to guide mutation. Kim et al. [13] propose Intender, which uses intent-state transitions as external guidance for network fuzzing and exposes semantic bugs. de Ruiter et al. [15] infer TLS protocol state machines via black-box testing and inspect them for spurious transitions. RESTler [30] generates REST API request sequences from specifications to explore cloud states and infer producer-consumer dependencies. Chen et al. [31] present IoTFuzzer, which leverages pro-tocol states between mobile apps and IoT devices. DifFuzz [32] is a resource-guided fuzzer for detecting time- and space-based side-channel vulnerabilities. Although EDG is not directly applicable to all of these prior scenarios, EDG 

can still be beneficial for state-guided fuzzers that test a single target entity. 

## 9 Conclusion 

In this work, we discuss approaches for collecting suitable feedback for fuzzing in scenarios where neither classic binary instrumentation nor static analysis are possible. In particular, we aim to detect the execution of novel code segments. To differentiate execution traces, we introduce the concept of execution diver-gence and show how it can be used to detect novel code execution, which can subsequently guide the fuzzer. We first introduce the simple divergence detection approach (Section 3.3), which directly compares execution traces to determine whether the current execution trace is unique. We then argue that, while the simple approach can be used to guide a fuzzer, it struggles with repeated ex-ecution of code segments. To address this false-positive problem, we develop algorithms such as Match First Traversal and Backlinking Candidates to recon-struct a graph from execution traces, namely the Execution Divergence Graph 

(Section 4). This EDG is essentially a CFG-like structure based on the code observed during execution so far. We implement the approach and experimentally demonstrate that execution-divergence-based approaches are effective for fuzzing real-world programs. We show that, in many scenarios, our EDG-based approach reaches similar coverage to that of traditional full instrumentation of the target, assuming such instru-mentation is possible. Our results also show that the EDG approach enables feedback in scenarios where traditional instrumentation is not possible. Even in such constrained settings, our EDG -based fuzzing can still discover timeouts and crashes in obfuscated binaries, whereas the black-box fuzzer finds none. Our artifact can be found at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/EDG-BBC4 

## References  

> 1. B. P. Miller, L. Fredriksen, and B. So, “An empirical study of the reliability of unix utilities,” Communications of the ACM , 1990. 2. Caca Labs, “zzuf,” http://caca.zoy.org/wiki/zzuf. 3. A. Helin, “RADAMSA,” https://gitlab.com/akihe/radamsa.

Execution Divergence Graphs 21 4. Peach Tech, “Peach Fuzzer,” https://peachtech.gitlab.io/peach-fuzzer-communi ty/. 5. Google, “Technical ”whitepaper” for afl-fuzz,” https://raw.githubusercontent.co m/google/AFL/61037103ae3722c8060ff7082994836a794f978e/docs/technical detai ls.txt, 2019. 6. A. Fioraldi, D. Maier, D. Zhang, and D. Balzarotti, “LibAFL: A framework to build modular and reusable fuzzers,” in Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) , 2022. 7. H. Peng, Y. Shoshitaishvili, and M. Payer, “T-fuzz: Fuzzing by program transfor-mation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P) ,2018. 8. P. Chen and H. Chen, “Angora: Efficient fuzzing by principled search,” in Proceed-ings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P) , 2018. 9. S. Schumilo, C. Aschermann, R. Gawlik, S. Schinzel, and T. Holz, “kafl: Hardware-assisted feedback fuzzing for os kernels,” in Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium , 2017. 10. C. Aschermann, S. Schumilo, T. Blazytko, R. Gawlik, and T. Holz, “REDQUEEN: fuzzing with input-to-state correspondence,” in Proceedings Network and Dis-tributed System Security Symp. (NDSS) , 2019. 11. C. Domas, “movfuscator,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/xoreaxe axeax/movfuscator?tab=readme-ov-file 12. Tigress, “The tigress c obfuscator,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://tigress.wtf/ 13. J. Kim, B. E. Ujcich, and D. Tian, “Intender: Fuzzing intent-based networking with intent-state transition guidance,” in Proceedings of the USENIX Security Sympo-sium , 2023. 14. Y. Zou et al. , “Blackbox fuzzing of distributed systems with multi-dimensional inputs and symmetry-based feedback pruning,” in Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) , 2025. 15. J. de Ruiter and E. Poll, “Protocol state fuzzing of tls implementations,” in Pro-ceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium , 2015. 16. C. Wang, “A security architecture for survivability mechanisms,” Ph.D. disserta-tion, University of Virginia, 2001. 17. C. Linn and S. K. Debray, “Obfuscation of executable code to improve resistance to static disassembly,” in Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) , 2003. 18. M. B¨ ohme, V. Pham, and A. Roychoudhury, “Coverage-based greybox fuzzing as markov chain,” in Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-nications Security (CCS) , 2016. 19. google, “DynamoRIO,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://dynamorio.org 20. K. Moczek, P. Szymczak, and Contributors, “minmea,” https://github.com/kos ma/minmea, 2023. 21. Greg Roelofs and the contributers, “libpng,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.libpng.org/pub/png/libpng.html 22. Contributors to Wikimedia projects, “NMEA 0183 - Wikipedia,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=NMEA 0183&oldid=1324 066764 23. lz4, “lz4,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/lz4/lz4 24. E. G¨ uler, C. Aschermann, A. Abbasi, and T. Holz, “Antifuzz: Impeding fuzzing audits of binary executables,” in Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium ,2019. 22 Yu-De Lin and Nils Ole Tippenhauer 25. J. Jung, H. Hu, D. Solodukhin, D. Pagan, K. H. Lee, and T. Kim, “Fuzzification: Anti-fuzzing techniques,” in Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium , 2019. 26. “MyJIT,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://myjit.sourceforge.net/index.htm 27. N. Havrikov and A. Zeller, “Systematically covering input structure,” in Proceed-ings of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engi-neering (ASE) , 2019. 28. M. Olsthoorn, A. van Deursen, and A. Panichella, “Generating highly-structured input data by combining search-based testing and grammar-based fuzzing,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), NIER Track , 2020. 29. X. Feng, R. Sun, X. Zhu, M. Xue, S. Wen, D. Liu, S. Nepal, and Y. Xiang, “Snipuzz: Black-box fuzzing of iot firmware via message snippet inference,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) ,2021. 30. V. Atlidakis, P. Godefroid, and M. Polishchuk, “Restler: Stateful rest api fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) ,2019. 31. J. Chen, W. Diao, Q. Zhao, C. Zuo, Z. Lin, X. Wang, W. C. Lau, M. Sun, R. Yang, and K. Zhang, “Iotfuzzer: Discovering memory corruptions in iot through app-based fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) , 2018. 32. S. Nilizadeh, C. S. P˘ as˘ areanu, and Y. Noller, “Diffuzz: Differential fuzzing for side-channel analysis,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2019.