An Empirical Analysis of CodeQL False Positives
and Query Refinements for Java Vulnerabilities
Amirali Sajadi
College of Computing & Informatics
Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
amirali.sajadi@drexel.edu
Saikat Dutta
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
saikatd@cornell.edu
Preetha Chatterjee
College of Computing & Informatics
Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
preetha.chatterjee@drexel.edu
Abstract—Static application security testing (SAST) tools help
developers find vulnerabilities before deployment. However, false
positive reports result in substantial triage efforts. This paper
studies whether CodeQL false positives in Java security analysis
are recurring, explainable patterns that can be reduced by
refining the analysis itself. We run CodeQL’s Java security query
suite on 167 CVE instances spanning 110 projects, focusing
on the ten queries with highest false positive rates. From
these queries, we manually review 500 sampled false positive
paths/locations and construct a source-level taxonomy of false
positive causes. The five high-level categories of false positive
causes are Missed Path Constraint or Sanitization (36.6%),
Benign Execution Context (29.4%), and Missing Trust Boundary
Modeling (27.6%), followed by Imprecise Concurrency Modeling
(5%) and Imprecise Sink Modeling (1.4%).
Using insights from our empirical analysis, we implement
CodeQL refinements that model recurring false positive patterns
to enable their detection and filtering at the query level. Our
refinements remove 81.8% of reviewed false positives. On the full
selected-query dataset, they remove 15.8% of reported paths and
locations while retaining 7/8 true positives, showing that many
false positives can be reduced directly in the analysis, but also
that fixed refinements often depend on project-specific context.
To address this generalization gap, we evaluate whether agentic
coding tools can adapt refinement patterns to new project-specific
contexts. With our refinement patterns as templates to extend,
they succeed on 56% and 62% of tasks, respectively, with query
compile-pass rates above 90%. However, without this guidance,
the success rates drop to 28% for both tools, while the compile
rate drops to 30-36%. Overall, our results support a refinement-
oriented SAST workflow in which recurring false positives are
modeled in CodeQL queries and then automatically adjusted to
different project contexts, reducing repeated triage.
Index Terms—Static application security testing, false positives,
CodeQL, Java vulnerabilities, taint analysis, query refinement
I. INTRODUCTION
Static Application Security Testing (or SAST) tools help
developers find vulnerabilities before software is deployed.
They are valuable as they can be automatically run codebases,
can be integrated into CI/CD workflows, and report source
locations that developers can inspect for bugs. However, false
positive alerts limit their overall effectiveness [1]–[5]. When a
tool reports too many alerts that do not correspond to real or
exploitable vulnerabilities, developers waste time triaging false
alerts instead of fixing real defects. Further, false positives
discourage the usage of SAST tools and limit their adoption
in broader open-source software. In practice, most developers
expect false positive rates below 15–20% for adoption, while
more than 76% of SAST warnings can be irrelevant to real
vulnerabilities [6], [7].
CodeQL [8] is one of the most popular query-based SAST
tools. Its query-driven design makes the analysis logic explicit
and allows the query to be inspected, modified, and re-
executed, making it well suited for systematically studying
how and why false positives arise. However, like other SAST
tools, CodeQL alerts can still be false positives. CodeQL relies
on predefined program patterns and taint analysis specifica-
tions to identify potential vulnerabilities. These specifications
model how user-controlled data (source) flows through the
program and reaches sensitive operations (sinks), but they can
often be incomplete, difficult to maintain, outdated, or overly
conservative. As a result, benign dataflows may be labeled as
dangerous when project-specific logic already ensures security.
For example, project-specific authentication mechanisms may
not be captured if they are not explicitly modeled in CodeQL’s
specifications. In these cases, the underlying issue is not only
that the alert needs to be filtered, but that the query cannot
accurately model the program’s behavior.
Prior work has studied why developers do not adopt SAST
and how false positive suppression can be used in practice [6],
[9], [10]. Others have studied the quality of SAST results and
taint analysis performance across tools and benchmarks [7],
[11]–[15]. However, these studies do not use source-level false
positive evidence to refine the underlying SAST analyses, nor
do they study whether such empirically grounded refinements
can be adapted to project-specific contexts. Recent work
has also used post-processing, ranking, exploit generation,
and LLM-based workflows to reduce false positives [16]–
[19]. However, LLM-based methods need to be used after
every run, which can become very expensive very quickly
in CI and they are also prone to imprecise reasoning, which
may be hard to reproduce. This motivates the question of
how to systematically incorporate fine-grained, project-specific
evidence into SAST analyses without incurring high manual
and monetary cost.
In this paper, we present a systematic study of false positive
reduction through CodeQL query refinements. Prior false posi-
tive studies mostly characterize static-analysis warnings, study
developer reactions, or filter alerts after they are reported.
Our study instead connects source-level false positive causes
arXiv:2609.04535v1  [cs.SE]  3 Sep 2026


Fig. 1. Overview of the Study Methodology.
to actionable changes in the CodeQL queries themselves.
Grounded in our empirical analysis, we design refinements
that model recurring false positive patterns directly in CodeQL
query logic. We then study whether agentic LLMs can adapt
these refinements to project-specific contexts. This differs from
LLM-based false positive filtering, where the model typically
filters the alerts after analysis has already run. In our setting,
the final artifact is a modified CodeQL query that can be
inspected, rerun, and reused to prevent similar false positives in
future analyses. However, maintaining separate refinements for
each project can be costly, since codebases and threat models
change over time. Our approach therefore studies reusable
refinements and agent-assisted adaptation as a way to make
project-specific query refinement more practical.
We frame our study around three main research questions:
RQ1: What are the source-level reasons behind CodeQL
false positives in Java projects? First, we run CodeQL’s
‘security-extended’ query suite on 167 CVEs, focusing on
the top ten queries that produce the most false positives.
We then manually inspect a statistically significant subset
of 500 confirmed false positives and identify fine-grained
causes grouped into five broader families, i.e., Missed Path
Constraint or Sanitization, Benign Execution Context, Missing
Trust Boundary Modeling, Imprecise Concurrency Modeling,
and Imprecise Sink Modeling. More importantly, this analysis
identifies the patterns behind the project-specific refinements
which must be modeled to adequately address false positives
in CodeQL queries.
RQ2. Can targeted query refinements reduce recurring
false positive patterns? We use the insights from RQ1 to de-
sign CodeQL refinements that encode recurring false positive
causes. Our refinements remove 409/500 (81.8%) reviewed
false positives, retaining 7/8 (87.5%) true positives across the
full dataset. While developers can suppress individual CodeQL
alerts at specific source locations, these suppressions only
affect the singular instance and do not address the underly-
ing analysis pattern. In contrast, our refinements address the
recurring false positive patterns directly in the query logic.
RQ3: Can agentic LLMs adapt CodeQL refinements
to project-specific contexts and prevent future false posi-
tives? Though our RQ2 refinements significantly reduce false
positives within the reviewed sample, their generalizability
remains limited as many refinements are project-specific. This
motivates our study of agent-based query adjustments. A
developer may review an alert and decide it is a false positive
in a specific project. We ask whether this feedback can be
used to adapt the relevant RQ2 refinement to that project.
In this setting, the agent receives a false positive, the project
context, and the corresponding refinement queries from RQ2
as a template to extend. The agent then adjusts the query in
order to eliminate the project-specific false positive pattern.
We evaluate this workflow using OpenAI Codex (GPT 5.5)
and Claude Code (Claude Opus 4.6) agents, showing that
guided refinements provide evidence-based reductions in false
positives in up to 56% of cases, compared to 28% when agents
write refinements without our RQ2 templates. The large gap
between guided and unguided runs highlights the value of
empirical refinement patterns as reusable templates for project-
specific query adaptation.
Our study reveals the following novel insights: First, our
results demonstrate that an overwhelming majority of false
positives can be captured using source-level patterns. Second,
most of these patterns can be modeled via CodeQL via targeted
query refinements, which drastically reduce false positives
while retaining true positive alerts. Third, these refinements
are very project-specific and so, by construction, they are very
hard to easily generalize to many projects. Finally, our early
evaluation of LLM agents reveal that they could be useful in
automating the query refinement task to some extent but they
often struggle with understanding the semantics of CodeQL
and the code pattern. So, more future research is needed to
carefully guide LLM agents into automating these refinements.
Our full replication package is available at [20].
II. METHODOLOGY
Figure 1 shows the overview of our study design. We use
a recent benchmark, CWE-Bench-Java [16], that contains 213
CVEs across 135 Java projects (Section II-A). To answer RQ1,
we run CodeQL and analyze the resulting alerts to characterize
the root causes of false positives (Section II-B). For RQ2,
we use the RQ1 taxonomy to design targeted CodeQL query
refinements and evaluate how many reviewed false positives
they remove while preserving the true positives (Section II-C).
For RQ3, we examine whether coding agents can adapt these
refinements to new project-specific contexts (Section II-D).


TABLE I
SELECTED CODEQL QUERIES RANKED BY ELIGIBLE FALSE POSITIVE COUNT.
Query
Description
CodeQL CWE tags
FP findings Paths and locations Projects
log-injection
User input reaches log output
CWE-117
11,613
31,777
99
sensitive-log
Sensitive data reaches logs
CWE-532
2,987
8,623
90
path-injection
User input influences file paths
CWE-022, CWE-023, CWE-036, CWE-073
1,195
3,567
73
tainted-arithmetic
User input affects arithmetic
CWE-190, CWE-191
830
2,249
62
xss
User input reaches web output
CWE-079
730
1,751
60
user-controlled-bypass
User input controls a security check
CWE-807, CWE-290
642
1,835
53
comparison-with-wider-type
Numeric comparison may be misleading
CWE-190, CWE-197
460
460
78
unreleased-lock
Lock may not be released
CWE-764, CWE-833
378
378
50
concatenated-sql-query
User input reaches SQL query text
CWE-089, CWE-564
334
334
37
csrf-unprotected-request-type Request handler may lack CSRF protection CWE-352
287
1,050
18
A. Dataset and Sampling
Dataset and CodeQL results. Our study uses Java CVE
projects from the CWE-Bench-Java dataset [16]. The bench-
mark contains 213 high-severity Java vulnerabilities across 45
CWE classes, including path traversal (CWE-022), cross-site
scripting (CWE-079), command injection (CWE-078), code
injection (CWE-094), XXE (CWE-611), and authentication
errors (CWE-287). Each CVE instance includes vulnerability
metadata, the vulnerable and fixed project versions, the code
locations changed by the security fix, and scripts to compile
each project version with CodeQL. The dataset also provides
containerized vulnerable versions that can be built and ana-
lyzed. This lets us run CodeQL and inspect alerts, paths, and
locations in the same project context.
We run CodeQL v2.25.4 on each vulnerable project ver-
sion using the Java security-extended suite from
codeql/java-queries v1.11.2. The resolved suite in-
cludes 124 queries. CodeQL produces one SARIF file per run,
containing the alerts reported by these queries. 167 vulnerable
project versions successfully built and produced CodeQL
reports across 110 unique projects. We use the same procedure
as [16] to classify each alert as a true positive or false positive:
an alert that contains path(s) triggering the vulnerable methods
related to the CVE is considered a true positive. While the
remaining paths can also indicate true positives, we defer this
reasoning to manual analysis in RQ2 III-B.
Sampling strategy. We sample false positives from the queries
that create the largest triage burden. We use alert count rather
than path count to rank the frequency of queries because
developers first encounter a CodeQL report as alerts, even
when one alert contains multiple reported paths. We then select
the ten queries with the most false positive alerts.
For manual review, we sample the concrete code evidence
reported by CodeQL. For path-producing alerts, each SARIF
codeFlows entry provides one source-to-sink path that can
be sampled. For location-only alerts, the primary reported
location provides one location that can be sampled. Thus, the
sampling pool for each query contains the paths and locations
reported by that query.
We use random sampling across the ten selected queries.
For each query, we randomly sample 50 eligible paths or
locations from that query’s pool, yielding 500 false positives
for manual review. This balanced selection gives each query
enough reviewed examples for query-level characterization.
The selected queries contain 19,456 eligible false positive
alerts, which expand to 52,024 eligible paths and locations
combined. Using the standard finite population sample size
formula with 95±5% confidence, this population requires 382
samples [21]–[24]. Our 500 instances exceed this requirement
and provide a statistically representative sample of the selected
false positive paths and locations.
B. RQ1: False Positive Characterization
Review artifacts. For RQ1, we manually review each sampled
false positive review unit using a structured source context
artifact. The artifact is generated from the CodeQL SARIF
output and the corresponding vulnerable project source tree.
For each reported location, our scripts map the file and line
number to the enclosing Java method or constructor declara-
tion. For path producing results, the artifact also contains the
ordered CodeQL source to sink path, the file and line of each
node, and the enclosing declaration for the source, sink, and
intermediate nodes when available.
During our review process, these artifacts provided the
starting context for each instance. When the reported path did
not provide enough context, we inspected the full vulnerable
project. Notably, the artifact renders relevant code snippets
with inline hop annotations. Reviewers use these hops to
follow the reported source-to-sink flow and inspect the sur-
rounding code when needed.
Manual review process. We use inductive coding [25], [26],
i.e., we derive labels from observations during our review to
identify recurring patterns of false positives in the dataset. We
inspect each sampled path or location and assess whether it
could correspond to the vulnerability reported by the CodeQL
query in that project.
Throughout the review, recurring distinctions became visible
around execution context, source control, trust boundaries,
value flow, guards, and sink behavior. We record five pieces
of evidence for each instance: 1) we identify the execution
context, such as production, test, tooling, framework, admin-
istrative, or internal cluster code; 2) we identify who could
control the reported source value in practice e.g., an unau-
thenticated user, privileged user, internal node, test harness,
etc.; 3) we record what kind of value was controlled, such
as a path, SQL fragment, identifier, configuration value, or
message object; 4) we check whether the reported value
reached the sink as data or only affected control flow, and


whether the sink was security relevant in its runtime context;
and 5) we record any protection before the sink, including
authorization, sanitization, allowlisting, parameterization, or
existence checks. After review, we write an explanation of the
root cause. For example, a path-injection alert may be marked
as having adequate sanitization when the reported path data is
first resolved to an absolute path and then checked against an
allowed base directory before the file operation.
Root cause labeling and taxonomy construction. We con-
struct a hierarchical taxonomy of false positives through
iterative coding. For each reviewed false positive, we assign
one or more fine-grained root cause labels and mark one label
as primary. The primary label captures the false positive root
cause that most directly explains why the reported CodeQL
path or location does not correspond to an exploitable vulner-
ability. When multiple facts contribute to the judgment, we
record them as secondary labels or notes.
We then review the written explanations for each false
positive, group recurring explanations into fine-grained labels,
and refine label definitions. After finalizing the fine-grained
labels, we group related labels into five higher-level families.
For example, labels involving explicit validation, constrained
control flow, and implicit program invariants are grouped
under the path constraint family.
C. RQ2: Query Refinement for False Positive Reduction
Refinement design. RQ2 evaluates whether the fine-grained
false positive mechanisms from RQ1 can be translated into
CodeQL refinements. For each fine-grained root-cause cat-
egory, we design a refinement predicate that captures the
program evidence used during manual review. These predi-
cates encode recurring evidence such as file paths, enclosing
callables, control-flow structure, validation and sanitization
patterns, value invariants, trusted value origins, authorization
contexts, logging contexts, lifecycle code, and lock cleanup
structure. The goal of RQ2 is not to produce a universal
replacement for the original CodeQL queries, but to test
whether query refinements can model the underlying issues
detected in RQ1 and how much false positive reduction those
refinements provide while preserving baseline true positives
i.e., paths/locations that match the benchmark CVE using the
CWE-Bench-Java labeling procedure described above.
Each refinement is implemented as a modified version of
an existing CodeQL query in Table I. The modified query
reuses the original logic and adds suppression predicates for
specific false positive patterns. A result is reported only if it is
produced by the original query and does not match the refine-
ment predicates. For each candidate refinement, we define four
elements before implementation. First, we identify the false
positive pattern from the RQ1 taxonomy. Second, we decide
which CodeQL rules can be refined to address that pattern.
Third, we identify the evidence needed to recognize the pat-
tern, such as source file paths, enclosing callables, dataflows,
expression names, types, annotations, packages, or method
calls. Fourth, we choose the suppression point. Depending on
the rule, the predicate may apply to the source, sink, enclosing
callable, primary expression, or reported method.
We write the predicates conservatively. A refinement sup-
presses a finding only when the code contains evidence for
the false positive pattern. If the same pattern could hide a
real vulnerability, we make the predicate more restrictive. For
example, a source-trust refinement may suppress logging of
application-generated identifiers such as request IDs, operation
names, or status values. It does not suppress values whose
names suggest sensitive data, such as passwords, tokens,
credentials, or secrets. Similarly, a sink-semantics refinement
may suppress an XSS finding only when the value is passed
through a known escaping or framework rendering API. It does
not suppress arbitrary writes to an HTTP response.
Evaluation. We evaluate each refinement at two levels. First,
we apply it to the 500 manually reviewed false positives. This
checks whether the refinement removes the RQ1 patterns it
was designed to target. Second, we apply it to all applicable
false positives outside the reviewed sample, checking whether
the pattern generalizes beyond the manually reviewed 500.
We consider a false positive removed when it appears in
the original CodeQL output but is suppressed by the refined
query. We also check whether any true positives are removed,
measuring the impact of our refinements on precision.
D. RQ3: Query Refinement Using Developer Feedback
Task construction. To answer RQ3, we construct 50 project-
specific refinement task instances from false positives outside
the 500 instances used in RQ1. A task instance is a concrete
query-refinement problem. It contains a target false positive,
the vulnerable project source code, and the corresponding Cod-
eQL query that reported the false positive path or location. We
use the target false positive as developer feedback, representing
a case where a developer has reviewed a CodeQL-reported
path or location and marked it as a false positive for that
project. The agent’s task is to modify the CodeQL query so
that it suppresses the project-specific false positive pattern
without removing known true positives. Our task sample
comes from the broader dataset after excluding the 500 false
positives used in RQ1. For each modified CodeQL query, we
sample 5 additional false positives, yielding 50 task instances.
For each task instance, we create two agent runs. Both runs
receive the task instance as input. The guided run additionally
receives the relevant RQ2 refinement pattern, defined as the
general query logic developed in RQ2 for the same query
and false positive reason. The agent must extend or adapt this
pattern to the local context of the project. The unguided run
does not receive the RQ2 refinement pattern and must design
the CodeQL refinement on its own. This comparison evaluates
whether the evidence-based RQ2 refinements provide useful
guidance for project-specific adaptation.
The guided agent receives only the relevant RQ2 refinement
pattern as a template, not a task-specific refined query for the
target false positive. The unguided agent receives no RQ2
refinement pattern. In both settings, the agent must produce
a semantic query-level refinement rather than an alert-specific


suppression, and we reject submissions that remove the target
only by matching the sampled file path, line number, result
index, or project name. All prompts are available in our
replication package [20].
Evaluation. We use the following process to evaluate the
guided and unguided runs. First, we rerun the submitted
query on the target project database and check whether it
removes the false positive used as feedback. Second, we run
the submitted query against the full selected-query dataset
and check whether it removes any known true positives. This
second check measures whether the project-specific adaptation
sacrifices recall while suppressing the target false positive.
We selected Codex with GPT 5.5 [27], [28] and Claude
Code with Claude Opus 4.5 [29], [30] as our agentic coding
systems. The task requires editing CodeQL queries in a repos-
itory, interpreting project context, and running commands,
which makes agentic tool use more relevant than prompt-based
code generation. Additionally, both these agents have proven
to be amongst the highest performing agentic systems [31].
III. RESULTS
A. RQ1: False Positive Reason Taxonomy
Our RQ1 dataset contains 500 manually confirmed false
positives, each labeled with a primary fine-grained category
that explains why the reported CodeQL vulnerability does
not correspond to a real vulnerability in context, along with
secondary categories when additional factors contribute to
the judgment. For example, a path may primarily be a false
positive because the tainted value is explicitly sanitized, while
also involving an operation restricted to an authorized or
privileged actor. In such cases, the primary category is the
reason we judge to be the most direct explanation for the false
positive, e.g., sufficient sanitization.
Overall, the fine-grained categories fall into five higher-level
false positive groups, as summarized in Table II. The group-
level counts use the primary category assigned to each false
positive, so the primary counts sum to 500. The fine-grained
breakdowns include both primary and secondary categories, so
those totals can be larger than the group-level primary count.
We observe that the most prevalent reason of FPs is Missed
Path Constraint or Sanitization (183/500, 36.6%), followed
by Benign Execution Context (147/500, 29.4%) and Missing
Trust Boundary Modeling (138/500, 27.6%). Other categories
include Imprecise Concurrency Modeling (25/500, 5.0%) and
Imprecise Sink Modeling (7/500, 1.4%). Across these FP
groups, the CodeQL query usually matched the pattern it
was designed to find, but manual review identified additional
factors explaining why these patterns do not constitute real
vulnerabilities. These factors include the effective trust or
disclosure boundary of the reported value, the environment
in which code is executed, checks or transformations applied
before a sink, and the behavior of the relevant API. Next, we
describe the five high-level FP groups in detail.
1) Missed Path Constraint or Sanitization. The most fre-
quent group covers alerts where a relevant flow, value, or
condition exists, but the reviewed code prevents the reported
behavior from being exploitable. Fine-grained reasons in this
group include explicit validation or sanitization, i.e., checks or
transformations before the sink; implicit program invariants,
such as numeric bounds or identifier formats that make the
reported behavior infeasible; and control-flow dependency
which refers to request-influenced routing rather than attacker-
controlled data reaching a dangerous sink.
Listing 1 shows a path-injection false positive. CodeQL reports
that a dataset name derived from the HTTP request path
reaches IO.deleteAll(), a recursive filesystem deletion
operation. The path is a false positive because the value is
constrained before deletion: it is converted into a dataset name
in lines 1–2, checked against the data access point registry
in lines 4–8, resolved under Fuseki’s configured database
root in lines 14–17, and deleted only after existence and
symbolic-link checks in lines 19–21. Together, these checks
show that the value is not used as an attacker-chosen file path.
Similar constraints appear in user-controlled-bypass and csrf-
unprotected-request-type, where request-influenced branches
or endpoint choices are constrained by the code.
1
String name = DataAccessPoint.canonical(
2
getItemName(action));
3
4
if (!action.getDataAccessPointRegistry()
5
.isRegistered(name)) {
6
ServletOps.errorNotFound(
7
"No such dataset registered: " + name);
8
}
9
10
DataAccessPoint ref =
11
action.getDataAccessPointRegistry().get(name);
12
action.getDataAccessPointRegistry().remove(name);
13
14
String filename = name.startsWith("/")
15
? name.substring(1) : name;
16
Path pDatabase =
17
FusekiWebapp.dirDatabases.resolve(filename);
18
19
if (Files.exists(pDatabase)
20
&& !Files.isSymbolicLink(pDatabase)) {
21
IO.deleteAll(pDatabase);
22
}
Listing 1. Example of Missed Path Constraint or Sanitization in apache/jena.
2) Benign Execution Context. The second largest group
contains alerts in code that is outside the relevant production
attack surface of the analyzed project version. At the fine-
grained level, this group includes non-production code such as
tests, examples, fixtures, and evaluation utilities; deployment
or bootstrap-limited code such as setup or migration logic; and
attacker-unreachable lifecycle code such as framework paths
outside the relevant production attack surface. Listing 2 shows
a SQL-concatenation false positive from apache/tika. CodeQL
reports a SQL constructed by concatenating strings, executed
through Statement.executeUpdate(). The pattern is
relevant, but the surrounding code belongs to Tika’s offline
evaluation tooling. It reads parser error logs from files supplied
to the evaluation command and updates an evaluation database.
The reviewed context does not expose this SQL construction
to untrusted production input.
1
// Offline evaluation tool.
2
public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception
{
3
Path xmlLogFileA = Paths.get(args[0]);


TABLE II
FALSE-POSITIVE TAXONOMY WITH PRIMARY GROUP COUNTS AND WITHIN-GROUP FINE-GRAINED BREAKDOWNS. FINE-GRAINED COUNTS INCLUDE
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY LABELS, SO THEIR WITHIN-GROUP TOTALS MAY EXCEED THE PRIMARY COUNT FOR THE GROUP.
FP group
Definition
Fine-grained breakdown
Primary FPs
Missed Path Constraint or Saniti-
zation
CodeQL reports a finding because it misses an explicit or im-
plicit constraint, validation, sanitization, or safe transformation
that prevents exploitation.
Control-flow dependency, 101/203 (49.8%); explicit vali-
dation or sanitization, 64/203 (31.5%); implicit program
invariant, 38/203 (18.7%)
183 (36.6%)
Benign Execution Context
The alert occurs in code whose execution context limits or
removes the relevant attack surface for the analyzed project
version.
Non-production
code,
112/177
(63.3%);
attacker-
unreachable lifecycle, 26/177 (14.7%); deployment or
bootstrap-limited code, 25/177 (14.1%); internal runtime
component, 14/177 (7.9%)
147 (29.4%)
Missing Trust Boundary Modeling
CodeQL overstates risk because it misses who can control the
value, who is authorized to act, or who is able to observe the
reported output.
Authorized or privileged actor, 126/230 (54.8%); trusted
value origin, 76/230 (33.0%); restricted disclosure chan-
nel, 28/230 (12.2%)
138 (27.6%)
Imprecise Concurrency Modeling
CodeQL reports a lifecycle or locking risk because it misses
cleanup or release behavior in the reviewed context.
Balanced cleanup, 25/25 (100.0%)
25 (5.0%)
Imprecise Sink Modeling
The reported value reaches a sink, but the sink does not perform
the dangerous operation assumed by the query.
Non-rendering helper or transport sink, 7/7 (100.0%)
7 (1.4%)
4
Path db = Paths.get(args[2]);
5
6
Connection connection = new
H2Util(db).getConnection();
7
writer.update(connection,
8
ExtractComparer.EXTRACT_EXCEPTION_TABLE_A,
9
xmlLogFileA);
10
}
11
12
private void update(String errorTableName, String
filePath)
13
throws SQLException {
14
String sql = "UPDATE " + errorTableName
15
+ " SET " + Cols.FILE_PATH + "=’" + filePath +
"’"
16
+ " where " + Cols.CONTAINER_ID + "="
17
+ getContainerId(filePath);
18
19
statement.executeUpdate(sql);
20
}
Listing 2. Example of Benign Execution Context in apache/tika.
3) Missing
Trust
Boundary
Modeling. Missing Trust
Boundary Modeling false positives arise when CodeQL treats a
value as attacker-controlled or attacker-observable, but project
context shows that the value is constrained by authoriza-
tion, privileged control, trusted origin, or limited disclosure,
i.e., restricted log/output access. At the fine-grained level,
authorized or privileged actor covers administrator-only or
internal-service workflows, trusted value origin covers values
produced by the application, framework, cluster peers, or
deployment configuration, and restricted disclosure channel
covers outputs limited to logs or internal channels. Listing 3
shows a path-injection false positive from apache/kylin. Cod-
eQL reports an HTTP request-supplied value flowing into
FileUtils.copyFile() in line 17, where the destination
file uses the request-derived principal value. The reported
dataflow is accurate: a value from the request influences the
file path. We classify the alert as a false positive because
the operation is part of an administrator-only workflow. The
@PreAuthorize annotation in lines 1–2 requires either
a global administrator role or project-level administration
permission before the method can execute. This authorization
boundary places the operation outside the untrusted user attack
surface. The path-injection query does not make that project-
specific threat-model judgment; it treats request-controlled
filesystem access as a vulnerability even when the request
reaches the sink only through a privileged administrative
operation.
1
@PreAuthorize(Constant.ACCESS_HAS_ROLE_ADMIN
2
+ " or hasPermission(#project, ’ADMINISTRATION’)")
3
public void updateProjectKerberosInfo(
4
String project,
5
ProjectKerberosInfoRequest request) throws
Exception {
6
checkAndReplaceProjectKerberosInfo(project,
7
request.getPrincipal());
8
backupAndDeleteKeytab(request.getPrincipal());
9
}
10
11
public File backupAndDeleteKeytab(String principal)
12
throws IOException {
13
File kFile = new File(
14
KapConfig.getKylinConfDirAtBestEffort(),
15
principal + KEYTAB_SUFFIX);
16
17
FileUtils.copyFile(kTempFile, kFile);
18
return kFile;
19
}
Listing 3. Example of Missing Trust Boundary Modeling in apache/kylin.
4) Imprecise
Concurrency
Modeling. The concurrency
group covers alerts where CodeQL reports a lock or lifecy-
cle operation as potentially unbalanced. Unlike the preced-
ing groups, these reports are not about attacker-controlled
values reaching security-sensitive sinks. Instead, they de-
pend on whether the analysis accurately tracks acquisition
and release behavior across control-flow paths. Listing 4
shows an unreleased-lock false positive from apache/rock-
etmq. CodeQL reports that the write lock acquired through
lockInterruptibly() might not be unlocked, or might
be locked more times than it is unlocked. In the reviewed
method, however, the acquisition appears inside an inner
try block whose corresponding finally block releases the
write lock before control can leave the protected region. The
method is also wrapped by an outer catch; under Java’s
try/finally semantics, exceptions from the protected re-
gion run the finally block before reaching that outer
handler. The alert is therefore best explained as a conservative
control-flow/lifecycle abstraction; the query finds a path whose
total lock count remains positive at method exit, even though
manual review shows that the relevant path is covered by the
finally cleanup.


TABLE III
DOMINANT PRIMARY FINE-GRAINED FALSE POSITIVE CATEGORY BY
SELECTED CODEQL QUERY. EACH QUERY CONTRIBUTES 50 CONFIRMED
FALSE POSITIVES. QUERY NAMES OMIT THE JAVA/ PREFIX.
CodeQL query
Dominant category
FP rate
comparison-with-wider-type
Implicit program invariant
35/50 (70.0%)
concatenated-sql-query
Non-production code
25/50 (50.0%)
csrf-unprotected-request-type
Control-flow dependency
36/50 (72.0%)
log-injection
Authorized or privileged actor
22/50 (44.0%)
path-injection
Explicit validation or sanitization
24/50 (48.0%)
sensitive-log
Restricted disclosure channel
15/50 (30.0%)
tainted-arithmetic
Explicit validation or sanitization
25/50 (50.0%)
unreleased-lock
Balanced cleanup
25/50 (50.0%)
user-controlled-bypass
Control-flow dependency
48/50 (96.0%)
xss
Authorized or privileged actor
13/50 (26.0%)
1
public void deleteTopic(
2
String topic, String clusterName) {
3
try {
4
try {
5
this.lock.writeLock()
6
.lockInterruptibly();
7
// update topic routing tables
8
} finally {
9
this.lock.writeLock().unlock();
10
}
11
} catch (Exception e) {
12
log.error("deleteTopic Exception", e);
13
}
14
}
Listing 4. Example of Imprecise Concurrency Modeling in RocketMQ.
5) Imprecise Sink Modeling. Some alerts reach APIs that
match a query’s sink, but the concrete API behavior does not
create the security risk modeled by the query. At the fine-
grained level, non-rendering helper or transport sink covers
internal byte movement rather than browser-rendered output,
while framework or template escaped sink covers output that
passes through rendering or escaping behavior before reaching
the client. Listing 5 shows an XSS false positive from Apache
apache/nifi. CodeQL reports data from a socket input stream
flowing into a write operation. However, the concrete write tar-
get is an internal stream wrapper used while transferring NiFi
content, not an HTTP response writer or template renderer.
The write copies bytes through NiFi’s internal content/protocol
path and does not create the browser HTML or JavaScript
interpretation for XSS.
1
// SocketInput.java
2
public SocketInput(final Socket socket)
3
throws IOException {
4
this.socket = socket;
5
socketIn = socket.getInputStream();
6
countingIn = new ByteCountingInputStream(socketIn);
7
bufferedIn = new BufferedInputStream(countingIn);
8
interruptableIn =
9
new InterruptableInputStream(bufferedIn);
10
}
11
12
// TaskTerminationOutputStream.java
13
public void write(byte[] b, int off, int len)
14
throws IOException {
15
verifyNotTerminated();
16
delegate.write(b, off, len);
17
}
Listing 5. Example of Imprecise Sink Modeling in Apache NiFi.
Distribution
of
Dominant
Categories
across
CodeQL
Queries. Table III shows that dominant false positive reasons
vary substantially across CodeQL queries. For user-controlled-
TABLE IV
EFFECTIVENESS OF RQ2 REFINEMENTS ON REVIEWED FALSE POSITIVES
AND THE FULL SELECTED-QUERY DATASET. THE TOTAL ROW
DE-DUPLICATED REMOVALS ACROSS REFINEMENTS.
Target RQ1 reason
Target FP rem.
Full FP rem.
Authorized or privileged actor
111/126 (88.1%)
526/19154 (2.7%)
Non-production code
87/112 (77.7%)
1620/20000 (8.1%)
Control-flow dependency
32/50 (64.0%)
347/643 (54.0%)
Trusted value origin
65/76 (85.5%)
201/19154 (1.0%)
Explicit validation or sanitization
61/64 (95.3%)
234/14988 (1.6%)
Implicit program invariant
32/35 (91.4%)
114/463 (24.6%)
Restricted disclosure channel
19/28 (67.9%)
85/15056 (0.6%)
Attacker-unreachable lifecycle
21/26 (80.8%)
40/383 (10.4%)
Deployment or bootstrap-limited code
10/12 (83.3%)
18/335 (5.4%)
Balanced cleanup
20/25 (80.0%)
188/383 (49.1%)
Internal runtime component
10/14 (71.4%)
18/16980 (0.1%)
Non-rendering helper or transport sink
7/7 (100.0%)
12/751 (1.6%)
De-duplicated total
409/500 (81.8%)
3158/20000 (15.8%)
bypass and csrf-unprotected-request-type, the dominant issue
is control-flow dependency: the alert is usually tied to a
request-influenced branch or endpoint choice, but manual
review does not find attacker-controlled data bypassing a
concrete security decision. Other queries depend more on
value constraints and validation, as in tainted-arithmetic and
path-injection, or implicit invariants, as in comparison-with-
wider-type. Logging-related queries depend more on actor
capability, trusted value origin, or restricted disclosure of the
reported output. XSS findings are more diffuse after the sink-
semantics audit, with authorized or privileged actor context
forming the largest single category. This query-level variation
motivates RQ2, where refinements must be tailored to specific
false positive categories rather than applied as a generic filter.
RQ1 Summary: CodeQL false positives follow recurring
source-level patterns, but dominant patterns vary by query,
suggesting that refinements should be query-specific.
B. RQ2: Effect of Query-Level False Positive Refinements
RQ2 evaluates whether fine-grained false positive mecha-
nisms identified in RQ1 can be used to create CodeQL query
refinements. We implement refinements for the fine-grained
mechanisms in the 500 manually reviewed false positives
whose evidence can be expressed as query-level predicates.
This evidence includes enclosing callables, local control-
flow structure, query-construction patterns, value invariants,
authorization checks, and framework-specific contexts. The
refinements test whether the program facts used during manual
false positive review can also be modeled inside CodeQL. RQ2
therefore measures how many reviewed false positives these
refinements remove, whether they preserve true positives, and
how many true/false positives they remove in the full dataset.
Baseline true positive counts. Before evaluating refinements,
we first measure how often the baseline CodeQL run identifies
known benchmark vulnerabilities covered by the selected
rules. CodeQL detected 7 of 81 applicable benchmark vulnera-
bilities (8.6%), yielding 56 true positives. These true positives
came from two rules. Path-injection detected 5 of 52 applicable
vulnerabilities and produced 53 true positives, while XSS
detected 2 of 24 applicable vulnerabilities and produced 3 true


TABLE V
REPORTED RQ2 REFINEMENTS AND THEIR TARGET RQ1 FALSE POSITIVE REASONS. RULE GROUPS ARE DEFINED BELOW THE TABLE.
Target RQ1 reason
RQ2 refinement
Applied rule(s)
Predicate condition
Authorized or privileged actor
Authorized or privileged actor
G1
Reviewed privileged, authentication, authorization callables and selected
auth decision shapes.
Non-production code
Non-production code
G0
Test, example, fixture, benchmark, demo, or generated paths.
Control-flow dependency
Control-flow dependency
User-controlled-
bypass
Routing or dispatch shaped control flow.
Trusted value origin
Trusted value origin
G1
Reviewed callables carrying constants, generated metadata, framework
or runtime state, or internal service values.
Explicit validation or sanitization
Explicit validation or sanitization
G2
Reviewed validated or sanitized callables plus selected range, clamp,
escaping, and normalization patterns.
Implicit program invariant
Implicit program invariant
Comparison-with-
wider-type
Local value, type, or numeric invariants.
Restricted disclosure channel
Restricted disclosure channel
G4
Reviewed logging callables for restricted diagnostic, administrative,
debug, or internal channels.
Attacker-unreachable lifecycle
Attacker-unreachable lifecycle
Unreleased-lock
Reviewed lifecycle or maintenance lock callables, including startup,
cleanup, recovery, and internal background paths.
Deployment or bootstrap-limited code
Deployment or bootstrap-limited code
Concatenated-sql-
query
Migration, schema update, installation, deployment, or bootstrap code.
Balanced cleanup
Balanced cleanup
Unreleased-lock
Matching release path, such as unlock in covering finally.
Internal runtime component
Internal runtime component
G3
Reviewed runtime, protocol, cache, token/session, metadata, and infras-
tructure component callables.
Non-rendering helper or transport sink
Non-rendering helper or transport sink
XSS
Internal stream, transport helper, or non-rendering output sink.
G0: all ten studied queries. G1: Log-injection, Sensitive-log, Path-injection, Tainted-arithmetic, XSS, User-controlled-bypass, Concatenated-sql-query,
CSRF-unprotected-request-type. G2: Concatenated-sql-query, Log-injection, Path-injection, Tainted-arithmetic, XSS. G3: Concatenated-sql-query, Log-injection, Sensitive-log,
Tainted-arithmetic, XSS. G4: Log-injection, Sensitive-log.
positive paths. Sensitive-log had 3 applicable benchmark vul-
nerabilities and detected none, while Concatenated-sql-query
had 2 applicable benchmark vulnerabilities and detected none.
The remaining selected rules had no applicable benchmark
vulnerability in this dataset. We use these 56 true positives to
observe whether the refinements preserve or remove them.
Refinement scope and effectiveness. Table V maps each
refinement to the RQ1 false positive reason it addresses.
The refinements cover all fine-grained mechanisms in the
RQ1 taxonomy. The table summarizes the rule scope and the
predicate condition used by each refinement.
Table IV reports both targeted and full dataset effective-
ness. Target false positive removal measures whether each
refinement removes false positives within the 500 reviewed
instances, while full false positive removal measures reduction
across all in-scope results in the dataset.
Overall, the refinements remove 409/500 (81.8%) re-
viewed false positives after de-duplication. They also re-
move 3158/20000 (15.8%) reported paths/locations in the
full selected-query dataset. The strongest targeted reductions
occur for non-rendering helper or transport sink (7/7, 100.0%),
explicit validation or sanitization (61/64, 95.3%), implicit
program invariant (32/35, 91.4%), authorized or privileged
actor (111/126, 88.1%), and trusted value origin (65/76,
85.5%). The remaining reviewed false positives often depend
on runtime or configurations, such as deployment modes,
framework configurations, or threat models assumptions. At
the same time, the refinements preserve most known true
positives. After de-duplicating overlaps across refinements,
they retain 49/56 (87.5%) baseline true positives. The seven
removed true positives come from non-production code and
from overlapping trusted value origin and explicit validation
or sanitization predicates.
Refinement Mechanisms. All refinements fall into one of the
following implementation styles. The listings show excerpts
from the refinement query files, focusing on predicates used to
suppress recurring false positive patterns. The full refinement
queries are included in our replication package [20].
The first style suppresses false positives using syntactic or
structural evidence that CodeQL can recognize locally. This
includes non-production paths, deployment or bootstrap code,
balanced lock cleanup, and non-rendering helper or transport
sinks. The non-rendering sink predicate removes the NiFi
Imprecise Sink Modeling example in RQ1, where the re-
ported write is an internal content/protocol stream rather than
browser-rendered output. These refinements are comparatively
direct because the predicate can match file paths, enclosing
methods, sink wrappers, or release paths without requiring
a project-wide threat model. Listing 6 shows a simplified
balanced-cleanup example that suppresses an Unreleased-lock
reported location when the same lock receiver is released
in a covering finally block. This refinement removes the
RocketMQ Imprecise Concurrency Modeling example in RQ1.
import java
import semmle.code.java.Concurrency
/** Refinement: same receiver, not only same lock type. */
predicate sameLockReceiver(Expr a, Expr b) {
a.(VarAccess).getVariable() =
b.(VarAccess).getVariable()
or
exists(FieldAccess fa, FieldAccess fb |
fa = a and fb = b and fa.getField() = fb.getField()
)
}
/** Refinement: acquisition has same-lock cleanup. */
predicate hasBalancedCleanup(MethodCall lock) {
exists(LockType t, MethodCall unlock |
lock = t.getLockAccess() and
unlock = t.getUnlockAccess() and
sameLockReceiver(lock.getQualifier(),
unlock.getQualifier()) and
unlock.getEnclosingStmt().getParent*() instanceof
FinallyStmt


)
}
from MethodCall lock
where not hasBalancedCleanup(lock)
select lock, "This lock might not be unlocked."
Listing 6. Simplified structural refinement for unreleased-lock false positives.
The second style suppresses false positives using local se-
mantic evidence around values and control flow. Explicit
validation or sanitization checks for validation, normalization,
escaping, range checks, and related guards before the reported
operation. Implicit program invariant captures value or type
constraints that make the reported comparison or arithmetic
behavior unreachable in practice. Control-flow dependency
captures cases where the reported operation is gated by routing
or dispatch logic that prevents the bypass condition from being
attacker-controlled in the way assumed by the original query.
The third style suppresses false positives using project-
context evidence. Authorized or privileged actor, trusted value
origin, restricted disclosure channel, attacker-unreachable life-
cycle, and internal runtime component all depend on recog-
nizing where the reported operation occurs in the application.
These predicates use reviewed callables, framework-specific
contexts, runtime components, internal service values, logging
contexts, or lifecycle methods to encode the evidence used
during manual review. Listing 7 shows a simplified authorized-
actor example. It does not infer authorization generally; it
suppresses findings only when the reported node is inside a
reviewed callable context for a specific rule. This refinement
also removes the Kylin Missing Trust Boundary Modeling
example in RQ1, where the reported file operation occurs
inside an administrator-only workflow.
import java
import semmle.code.java.security.LogInjectionQuery
import LogInjectionFlow::PathGraph
/** Refinement: reviewed privileged contexts. */
predicate isAuthorizedContext(Callable c) {
c.getDeclaringType().getName() =
"OAuthProviderProcessingFilter" and
c.getName() = "validateSignature"
// Additional reviewed contexts omitted.
}
/** Refinement: node is inside privileged context. */
predicate suppressAuthorizedFinding(DataFlow::Node n) {
exists(Expr e |
n.asExpr() = e and
isAuthorizedContext(e.getEnclosingCallable())
)
}
from LogInjectionFlow::PathNode source,
LogInjectionFlow::PathNode sink
where
LogInjectionFlow::flowPath(source, sink) and
not suppressAuthorizedFinding(sink.getNode())
select sink.getNode(), source, sink, "..."
Listing 7.
Simplified context-based refinement for authorized or privileged
actor false positives.
RQ2 Summary: Recurring false-positive patterns can be
modeled directly in CodeQL query logic, substantially re-
ducing false positives while preserving most true positives.
However, fixed refinements have limited generalization
when the pattern depends on project-specific context.
TABLE VI
RQ3 PER-QUERY COMPILE AND SUCCESS RESULTS. EACH CELL REPORTS
THE QUERY COMPILE (PASS) COUNTS.
Query
Unguided
Guided
Codex Claude Codex Claude
comparison-with-wider-type
2 (2)
3 (3)
4 (3)
4 (3)
concatenated-sql-query
1 (1)
0 (0)
5 (4)
5 (4)
csrf-unprotected-request-type
4 (4)
2 (2)
5 (5)
3 (3)
log-injection
1 (1)
3 (2)
5 (1)
5 (1)
path-injection
0 (0)
0 (0)
4 (0)
5 (3)
sensitive-log
0 (0)
4 (2)
5 (3)
4 (2)
tainted-arithmetic
1 (1)
0 (0)
3 (1)
5 (5)
unreleased-lock
2 (2)
3 (3)
5 (4)
5 (3)
user-controlled-bypass
3 (2)
1 (0)
5 (3)
5 (3)
xss
1 (1)
2 (2)
4 (4)
5 (4)
Total
15 (14) 18 (14) 45 (28) 46 (31)
C. RQ3: Query Refinement Using Developer Feedback
Table VI reports compile-pass and success results for Codex
and Claude Code in guided and unguided settings. A task is
successful when the submitted query compiles and removes
the target false positive.
Overall, agents struggle to write CodeQL refinements from
scratch. In the unguided setting, Codex produces compiling
queries for 15/50 (30.0%) tasks and Claude Code for 18/50
(36.0%) tasks. Both agents write successful queries in 14/50
(28.0%) tasks. This suggests that while agents can sometimes
produce effective queries, their overall success rate remains
low, and many attempts fail due to syntax issues or incomplete
query construction that prevent compilation.
Guidance from the RQ2 refinements substantially improves
both compilation and success rates. In the guided setting,
Codex produces compiling queries for 45/50 (90.0%) tasks
and successful refinements for 28/50 (56.0%) tasks. Claude
Code produces compiling queries for 46/50 (92.0%) tasks
and successful refinements for 31/50 (62.0%) tasks. Across
both agents, guided refinement succeeds at double or more
than the unguided success rate. Similarly, the compile-pass
rate increases from 33/100 (33.0%) in the unguided setting to
91/100 (91.0%) in the guided setting.
These results show that the RQ2 refinements are useful
as adaptation templates. Rather than filtering individual false
positives, agents use the refinement logic as a starting point
and adjust it to project-specific requirements. Some guided
queries compile but do not remove the target false positive,
especially for queries such as java/log-injection and
java/path-injection. This suggests that some false
positives require project context that is hard for agents to cap-
ture and express as a local query adjustment. Regardless, the
guided setting consistently improves over unguided refinement
for both agents, showing that evidence-based refinement pat-
terns make agent-assisted CodeQL adaptation more effective.
RQ3 Summary: Agentic LLMs are most effective when
extending our empirically grounded refinements, not when
writing CodeQL refinements from scratch. Our refinements
can therefore serve as templates to automatically create
project-specific queries for false positive reduction.


IV. RELATED WORK
Developer experience with SAST false positives. Prior work
shows that false positives are a key reason why developers
distrust or avoid static analysis tools. Developers often ignore
warnings that are hard to understand, poorly integrated into
workflows, or unactionable [9]. Adoption also depends on
practical tool qualities such as good warning phrasing, low
false positive rates, workflow integration, suppression support,
and relevance to developer priorities [6]. Code-level suppres-
sions of static analysis warnings are common and often arise
from false positives, imprecise warning messages, inaccurate
analyzer configuration, third-party code, and developer deci-
sions [10]. These studies explain why false positives matter in
practice. Our work differs by analyzing why specific CodeQL
security paths are false positives, using evidence from source
code and trust boundaries, as well as by testing whether
recurring causes can guide query refinements.
Empirical studies of SAST and taint-analysis limitations.
Several studies analyze static analysis tools and the warnings
they produce. Aloraini et al. [32] studied how SAST security
warnings differ in their tendency to be false positives. Cui et
al. [11] examined false positive and false negative issues in
PMD [33], SpotBugs [34], and SonarQube [35] by inspecting
issue reports, issue-triggering programs, analyzer specifica-
tions, implementations, and fixing patches. Charoenwet et
al. [7] evaluated SAST tools for secure code review using
vulnerability contributing commits in C and C++ projects and
found that many warnings in vulnerable functions were irrel-
evant to the reviewed vulnerabilities. Li et al. [12] evaluated
query-based SAST detectability for C/C++ vulnerabilities and
examined query-quality issues. Related taint-analysis studies
also show that false positives can arise from analyzer ab-
straction limits, such as infeasible paths, framework modeling,
and configuration choices [13]–[15], [36]–[39]. These works
quantify static analysis limitations across tools, warning types,
analyzer issues, or taint-analysis settings. Our work focuses in-
stead on CodeQL security paths in Java CVE projects. Rather
than classifying only the reported vulnerability location, we
inspect the full reported path, including its source, intermediate
flow steps, sink, and surrounding project context. We then
organize the explanations into higher-level groups and fine-
grained reasons, connecting broad false-positive mechanisms
to the concrete evidence observed along each path.
Validation of SAST alerts. Prior work has studied how
to audit, validate, rank, or reduce reported static analysis
alerts. Svoboda et al. [40] proposed a lexicon and rules for
reviewing static analysis alerts. Muske and Khedker [41]
used additional static analysis to eliminate false positives by
checking whether assertion warnings are valid. Muske and
Serebrenik [42] surveyed postprocessing approaches for SAST
alarms. Wei et al. [17] proposed OASIS, which ranks Android
Lint warnings by linking warning context to user reviews.
Additionally, exploit generation has also been explored as
a way of validating potential software vulnerabilities [43]–
[48]. Wen et al. [18] use LLMs to inspect static bug warn-
ings, and Xiong and Zhang [49] compare Aider, OpenHands,
and SWE-agent for vulnerability false positive filtering on
OWASP Benchmark cases and real-world Java projects. QL-
Coder [19] synthesizes CodeQL queries for security vulnera-
bility detection, while Knighter [50] uses LLMs to synthesize
static-analysis checkers. CVE-Bench [51] and Sec-Bench [52]
evaluate LLM agents on real-world software security tasks,
including CVE repair and broader security workflows. These
works make static analysis and security tooling more useful
by supporting manual review, ranking, false positive filtering,
and exploitability validation. Our work complements these
efforts by shifting the focus from alert-level postprocessing
and standalone query synthesis to query-level refinement of
existing CodeQL rules. We also study whether LLM agents
can adapt these refinement patterns to project-specific contexts,
producing executable query changes rather than black-box
alert verdicts.
V. THREATS TO VALIDITY
Internal validity. False-positive classification depends on
reviewer judgment, especially when findings involve project-
specific detilas and threat models. We mitigate this by inspect-
ing the full reported path and surrounding project context,
recording evidence for each label, and excluding sampled
cases that appeared to be plausible true positives. The RQ2
refinements may also overfit to the reviewed findings, so we
implement them as CodeQL predicates over recurring program
facts rather than file, line, or result-specific suppressions, and
evaluate them on the full dataset.
External validity. Our study focuses on CodeQL, Java
projects, and the ten queries with the highest false positive
rates in our dataset. Thus, our results may not generalize to
all languages, tools, query sets, or agents. To mitigate this
threat, we chose a practical and representative setting: Java is
widely used in server-side software, CodeQL is an industrial
SAST framework used in real development workflows, and the
selected queries correspond to the highest false positive rates
we observed. While our claims are limited to the evaluated
setting, the study provides evidence for common SAST use
cases and a foundation for future work in broader contexts.
Construct validity. We use benchmark CVE alignment to
separate findings that correspond to the known vulnerability
from findings that do not align with the benchmark CVE. A
non-aligned finding may still be a real vulnerability, so we
manually inspected sampled findings before assigning false-
positive labels. RQ2 and RQ3 measure true-positive preser-
vation using known benchmark true positives; refinements
that preserve these findings could still suppress unknown
vulnerabilities outside the benchmark oracle.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we studied whether recurring false positives in
Java security SAST can be addressed through CodeQL query
refinements. From 500 manually reviewed false positives, we
identified five groups of source-level causes and used them
to design executable refinements. These refinements removed


over 80% of reviewed false positives and 15.79% of false
positives in the full selected-query dataset while retaining
87.5% of known true positives. We then evaluated whether
agentic coding systems can adapt these refinement patterns to
new project-specific false positives. Without guidance, Codex
and Claude Code each succeeded on 14/50 tasks. With our
refinement patterns, they succeeded on 28/50 and 31/50 tasks,
respectively, with compile-pass rates above 90%. Overall, our
results support a SAST workflow in which recurring false
positive patterns can be first modeled as query refinements and
then adapted to project-specific contexts to reduce repeated
manual triage.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Guo, T. Tan, S. Liu, X. Liu, W. Lai, Y. Yang, Y. Li, L. Chen,
W. Dong, and Y. Zhou, “Mitigating false positive static analysis warn-
ings: Progress, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 5154–5188, 2023.
[2] P. Emanuelsson and U. Nilsson, “A comparative study of industrial static
analysis tools,” Electronic notes in theoretical computer science, vol.
217, pp. 5–21, 2008.
[3] M. Nadeem, B. J. Williams, and E. B. Allen, “High false positive
detection of security vulnerabilities: a case study,” in Proceedings of
the 50th annual ACM Southeast Conference, 2012, pp. 359–360.
[4] I. Medeiros, N. F. Neves, and M. Correia, “Automatic detection and
correction of web application vulnerabilities using data mining to predict
false positives,” in Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on
World wide web, 2014, pp. 63–74.
[5] C. Dimastrogiovanni and N. Laranjeiro, “Towards understanding the
value of false positives in static code analysis,” in 2016 Seventh Latin-
American Symposium on Dependable Computing (LADC). IEEE, 2016,
pp. 119–122.
[6] M. Christakis and C. Bird, “What developers want and need from
program analysis: an empirical study,” in Proceedings of the 31st
IEEE/ACM international conference on automated software engineering,
2016, pp. 332–343.
[7] W. Charoenwet, P. Thongtanunam, V.-T. Pham, and C. Treude, “An
empirical study of static analysis tools for secure code review,” in
Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on
software testing and analysis, 2024, pp. 691–703.
[8] GitHub, “CodeQL,” https://codeql.github.com/.
[9] B. Johnson, Y. Song, E. Murphy-Hill, and R. Bowdidge, “Why don’t
software developers use static analysis tools to find bugs?” in 2013 35th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2013,
pp. 672–681.
[10] H. Hu, Y. Wang, J. Rubin, and M. Pradel, “An empirical study of sup-
pressed static analysis warnings,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software
Engineering, vol. 2, no. FSE, pp. 290–311, 2025.
[11] H. Cui, M. Xie, T. Su, C. Zhang, and S. H. Tan, “An empirical study of
false negatives and positives of static code analyzers from the perspective
of historical issues,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.13855, 2024.
[12] Z. Li, Z. Liu, W. K. Wong, P. Ma, and S. Wang, “Evaluating c/c++
vulnerability detectability of query-based static application security
testing tools,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 4600–4618, 2024.
[13] L. Luo, E. Bodden, and J. Sp¨ath, “A qualitative analysis of android taint-
analysis results,” in 2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering (ASE).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 102–114.
[14] S. Arzt, S. Rasthofer, R. Hahn, and E. Bodden, “Using targeted symbolic
execution for reducing false-positives in dataflow analysis,” in Proceed-
ings of the 4th ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on State of the
Art in Program Analysis, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[15] L. Qiu, Y. Wang, and J. Rubin, “Analyzing the analyzers: Flow-
droid/iccta, amandroid, and droidsafe,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
2018, pp. 176–186.
[16] Z. Li, S. Dutta, and M. Naik, “Iris: Llm-assisted static analysis for de-
tecting security vulnerabilities,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, vol. 2025, 2025, pp. 35 735–35 758.
[17] L. Wei, Y. Liu, and S.-C. Cheung, “Oasis: prioritizing static analysis
warnings for android apps based on app user reviews,” in Proceedings
of the 2017 11th joint meeting on foundations of software engineering,
2017, pp. 672–682.
[18] C. Wen, Y. Cai, B. Zhang, J. Su, Z. Xu, D. Liu, S. Qin, Z. Ming, and
T. Cong, “Automatically inspecting thousands of static bug warnings
with large language model: How far are we?” ACM Transactions on
Knowledge Discovery from Data, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1–34, 2024.
[19] C. Wang, Z. Li, S. Dutta, and M. Naik, “Qlcoder: A query syn-
thesizer for static analysis of security vulnerabilities,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.08462, 2025.
[20] “Replication package,” https://shorturl.at/L0QEK, 2026.
[21] K. Rv and M. Dw, “Determining sample size for research activities,”
Educ psychol meas, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 607–610, 1970.
[22] M. A. Bujang and N. Baharum, “A simplified guide to determination
of sample size requirements for estimating the value of intraclass
correlation coefficient: a review.” Archives of orofacial science, vol. 12,
no. 1, 2017.
[23] A. Sajadi, K. Damevski, and P. Chatterjee, “Towards understanding
emotions in informal developer interactions: A gitter chat study,” in
Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering,
2023, pp. 2097–2101.
[24] H. Shu, D. Wang, A. Mastropaolo, G. Bavota, and Y. Kamei, “An
empirical study on language models for generating log statements in test
code,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology,
vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1–33, 2026.
[25] J. Salda˜na, “The coding manual for qualitative researchers,” 2021.
[26] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in psychology,”
Qualitative research in psychology, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 77–101, 2006.
[27] OpenAI, “Codex CLI,” https://openai.com/codex/, 2026.
[28] ——, “GPT-5.5 Model,” https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-
5.5, 2026.
[29] Anthropic, “Claude Code Overview,” https://claude.com/product/claude-
code, 2026.
[30] ——,
“Introducing
Claude
Opus
4.5,”
https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-opus-4-5.
[31] Agent Arena, “Agent Arena: AI Agent Performance Leaderboard,”
https://arena.ai/leaderboard/agent, 2026.
[32] B. Aloraini, M. Nagappan, D. M. German, S. Hayashi, and Y. Higo, “An
empirical study of security warnings from static application security
testing tools,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 158, p. 110427,
2019.
[33] “PMD,” https://pmd.github.io/, 2024.
[34] “SpotBugs,” https://spotbugs.github.io/, 2024.
[35] G. A. Campbell and P. P. Papapetrou, SonarQube in action.
Manning
Publications Co., 2013.
[36] J. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Qiu, and J. Rubin, “Analyzing android taint
analysis tools: Flowdroid, amandroid, and droidsafe,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 4014–4040, 2021.
[37] A. Mordahl and S. Wei, “The impact of tool configuration spaces on the
evaluation of configurable taint analysis for android,” in Proceedings of
the 30th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis, 2021, pp. 466–477.
[38] J. Wang, Y. Wu, G. Zhou, Y. Yu, Z. Guo, and Y. Xiong, “Scaling static
taint analysis to industrial soa applications: a case study at alibaba,”
in Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering, 2020, pp. 1477–1486.
[39] A. Antoniadis, N. Filippakis, P. Krishnan, R. Ramesh, N. Allen, and
Y. Smaragdakis, “Static analysis of java enterprise applications: frame-
works and caches, the elephants in the room,” in Proceedings of the
41st ACM SIGPLAN conference on programming language design and
implementation, 2020, pp. 794–807.
[40] D. Svoboda, L. Flynn, and W. Snavely, “Static analysis alert audits:
Lexicon and rules,” in SecDev, 2016, pp. 37–44.
[41] T. Muske and U. P. Khedker, “Efficient elimination of false positives
using static analysis,” in 2015 IEEE 26th International Symposium on
Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 270–280.
[42] T. Muske and A. Serebrenik, “Survey of approaches for postprocessing
of static analysis alarms,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 55,
no. 3, pp. 1–39, 2022.


[43] A. Sajadi, T. Nguyen, K. Damevski, and P. Chatterjee, “Axe: An agentic
exploit engine for confirming zero-day vulnerability reports,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.14345, 2026.
[44] V. Nitin, B. Ray, and R. Z. Moghaddam, “Faultline: Automated
proof-of-vulnerability generation using llm agents,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.15241, 2025.
[45] S. Ullah, P. Balasubramanian, W. Guo, A. Burnett, H. Pearce,
C. Kruegel, G. Vigna, and G. Stringhini, “From cve entries to verifiable
exploits: An automated multi-agent framework for reproducing cves,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01835, 2025.
[46] J. Akhoundali, H. Hamidi, K. Rietveld, and O. Gadyatskaya, “Eradicat-
ing the unseen: Detecting, exploiting, and remediating a path traversal
vulnerability across github,” in Proceedings of the 20th ACM Asia
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2025, pp. 542–
558.
[47] D. Simsek, A. Eghbali, and M. Pradel, “Pocgen: Generating proof-of-
concept exploits for vulnerabilities in npm packages,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.04962, 2025.
[48] H. Huang, J. Shi, J. Chen, T. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Yang, E. L. Ouh, L. K.
Shar, and D. Lo, “Penforge: On-the-fly expert agent construction for
automated penetration testing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.06910, 2026.
[49] Y. Xiong and T. Zhang, “Sifting the noise: A comparative study
of llm agents in vulnerability false positive filtering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.22952, 2026.
[50] C. Yang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xie, H. Li, and L. Zhang, “Knighter: Transforming
static analysis with llm-synthesized checkers,” in Proceedings of the
ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2025,
pp. 655–669.
[51] P. Wang, X. Liu, and C. Xiao, “Cve-bench: Benchmarking llm-based
software engineering agent’s ability to repair real-world cve vulnera-
bilities,” in Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the
Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2025, pp.
4207–4224.
[52] H. Lee, Z. Zhang, H. Lu, and L. Zhang, “Sec-bench: Automated bench-
marking of llm agents on real-world software security tasks,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 38, pp. 116 342–116 378,
2026.
