Title: Agent-Driven Verification of Memory Safety for liblzma Decoder Components with VST

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.29716v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 01:18:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Agent-Driven Verification of Memory Safety for liblzma Decoder Components with VST 

Prokhor Shlyakhtun 1, Alexander Gryzlov 1,2, Vladimir Kukharenko 1, Vasilii Nesterov 1, Nikolai Vasiliev 1, Kirill Ziborov 1, Eugene Zolotarev 1, and Alex Pokras 1 

> 1

GenProof, USA 

{orenty7, alexgryzlov, vladimir, vasa, nick, kirill, eugene, alex}@genproof.com  

> 2

IMDEA Software Institute, Madrid, Spain 

Abstract. We report on the verification of memory safety for decoder components of liblzma , the compression library underlying xz-utils : the LZMA2 state machine, the LZMA1 decoder it controls, the outer de-coding path, and the shared sliding-window dictionary. Built with the Verified Software Toolchain (VST), machine-checked body theorems es-tablish memory safety and partial functional correctness. Across 27 com-pleted body proofs, the largest covers lzma decode , whose 338 source lines expand to 1,934 lines of C after preprocessing; its proof comprises 183,268 lines of proof script over 775,768 lines of mechanically extracted goal statements. The verification exposed undefined behavior in raw LZMA1 zero-input handling, where range-decoder macros add zero to a null pointer and subtract two null pointers. Unlike similar work that synthesizes verified code, we verify pre-existing, production-scale C. AI agents complete proof goals and propose refine-ments; humans write and review models and specifications, and approve semantic changes; the Rocq kernel checks the proof terms. With agents constructing the proof scripts, the main engineering prob-lems lay in translating and modeling production C, building a robust har-ness for driving Rocq , and providing feedback for proving agents. VST’s assertion logic expressed every contract required by the development. We describe the pipeline, coordination mechanisms, and proof-engineering techniques that resolved these frictions. 

Keywords: Memory safety · Separation logic · VST · liblzma · LLM agents · Proof automation · Experience report 

## 1 Introduction 

liblzma , the compression library underlying xz-utils , is a widely used open-source dependency. The 2024 xz backdoor (CVE-2024-3094) [15] highlighted the trust placed in this codebase. While that attack used release and build machinery rather than a memory-safety defect, memory-safety defects are the largest single class of exploited vulnerabilities in C and C++ code, on the order of 70% of arXiv:2608.29716v1 [cs.SE] 30 Aug 2026 2 P. Shlyakhtun et al. 

serious issues at organizations such as Microsoft [14]. We therefore address the library’s own code: whether decoder bodies can be proved safe under explicit function contracts. The Verified Software Toolchain (VST) [4,7] supports foundational verifica-tion of C programs through separation-logic proofs over CompCert semantics [12], but the process remains labor-intensive. In our pipeline, AI agents construct and repair proofs and may propose specification refinements. Humans approve every change to a model or function specification before agents propagate it through dependent proofs; the kernel of Rocq (formerly Coq )3 checks the resulting proof terms. The liblzma case study examines both this division of labor and the proof engineering needed to sustain it on production C. The reported decoder scope contains 22 VST body proofs closed through 

Qed with no uses of admit or Admitted , covering the LZMA2 framing state machine, outer decoding path, sliding-window dictionary, six supporting LZMA1 functions, and the LZMA1 decoding core. Each theorem establishes Clight safety and model-relative partial functional correctness for its function body, assuming the corresponding contract’s precondition and imported contracts. This safety result rules out invalid memory accesses that the semantics represents as stuck execution ( § 2.1); § 6 gives the inventory and contract boundary. The archived artifact contains the Rocq /VST proof sources, verified liblzma source snapshot, and build instructions [20]. At 183,268 lines of proof script, the body proof for lzma decode is the largest; 

§ 6 explains its scale. Verifiable C does not support the function’s original Duff’s device 4 control flow, so the verified 338-line C function uses an explicit state machine; after CompCert preprocessing, its body spans 1,934 nonblank lines of C. Proof construction spanned 1,595 agent sessions over 70 days ( § 3.2). Verification also exposed source-level undefined behavior in the raw LZMA1 zero-input path: range-decoder macros add zero to a null pointer and subtract two null pointers, outside C’s defined pointer-arithmetic cases [11, 6.5.7] ( § 6). This paper makes the following contributions: 

– An agent–human workflow for C verification that assigns proof con-struction and repair to agents while humans retain authority over models and function contracts ( § 3, § 4). 

– A body-level verification of liblzma decoder components with 22 closed VST body proofs ( § 4, § 6). 

– Agent engineering for long-running proof development: structured 

Rocq interaction, standalone goal extraction, incremental checking, multi-agent orchestration, and durable session handoffs ( § 3.2). 

– Proof engineering for production C and VST: build-aware Clight gen-eration, model testing against executions, and source normalization ( § 5).            

> 3Legacy tool and project names such as coqc and CertiCoq retain the former name.
> 4Duff’s device places case labels inside a loop body, allowing a switch to enter the loop at different points. Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 3

– Agent-driven proof optimization: a mechanically orchestrated agent swarm that profiles and refactors completed proofs to reduce checking time (§ 3.2). 

## 2 Background 

Interpreting the result requires a precise account of what a VST body theorem guarantees and which decoder components it covers. 

2.1 The Verified Software Toolchain 

Separation logic extends Hoare logic with memory ownership. Its P ∗Q connective requires disjoint footprints, while the frame rule preserves untouched state during local reasoning [18]. These features support modular verification of pointer-rich decoder structures. 

Verifiable C provides VST’s program logic and automation for Clight , Com-pCert ’s C intermediate language [4,7]. clightgen preprocesses and translates C into a Clight abstract syntax tree embedded in Rocq . A function specification 

(funspec ) uses WITH for logical parameters, PRE for arguments and owned mem-ory, and POST for return values and updated memory. Assertions such as data at 

and field at link logical values to C objects and fields. A semax body theorem proves that one function body satisfies its funspec as-suming the contracts in its global environment ( Gprog ). VST scripts use forward symbolic-execution tactics 5 such as start function , forward , forward if , and 

forward call ; entailer! handles entailments. The Rocq kernel checks the as-sembled proof term. 

Scope of body theorems. A verification scope names an entry point and enumer-ates the in-project implementation functions whose bodies the result is intended to cover; calls outside that set, such as library routines, are treated as imports. 

§ 6.2 gives the scope for this case study and reports which individual body the-orems are closed , i.e., proved through Qed with no uses of admit or Admitted .Under the funspec precondition and imported contracts, a closed semax body 

theorem establishes that execution cannot get stuck in the CompCert Clight 

operational semantics. This rules out every run-time error that this semantics represents as stuck execution, including memory faults; if the function returns normally, its result satisfies the model-derived postcondition. Thus semax body 

supplies Clight safety and model-relative partial functional correctness. It does not by itself establish termination, total correctness, trace refinement, or com-patibility between separately maintained caller and callee contracts.   

> 5In Rocq , tactics are metaprograms that construct fragments of the proof term.

4 P. Shlyakhtun et al.     

> .xz container & filter layer (excluded) outer decoding path
> decode buffer /lz decode
> LZMA2 chunk-framing state machine
> lzma2 decode
> embedded LZMA1
> lzma decode
> uncompressed chunk copy shared sliding-window dictionary (circular) caller’s input buffer caller’s output buffer suspend / resume compressed chunks uncompressed chunks match copy
> verified components

Fig. 1. The liblzma LZMA2 decoding path. Thin arrows show control, thick gray ar-rows show byte flow, dashed loops mark suspension and resumption, and the dashed enclosure marks the verified scope. 

2.2 The liblzma Library 

Target selection. We initially considered several alternative C codebases, includ-ing SQLite , Lua , Brotli , and others, but their size or reliance on features outside VST’s supported C subset made them unsuitable. We encountered only a few such features in liblzma ; § 5.3 describes the required transformations. 

Decoder structure. liblzma ’s LZMA decoder interleaves an adaptive binary range coder [19,17] with an LZ77 -style dictionary [23]. The range coder reconstructs bits that the LZMA state machine interprets as either a literal byte or a back-reference ( distance , length ) into recently decoded output. That output is retained in a fixed-size circular buffer (the sliding window ); a match copies bytes one at a time modulo the buffer size, allowing its source and destination to overlap when 

length > distance . The resulting proof obligations combine bit-level normaliza-tion, overlapping copies, wrap-around indexing, and pointer arithmetic. 

Scope. Figure 1 sketches the decoding path and the verified scope. The verified portion spans three source files. In lzma2 decoder.c , it includes the LZMA2 framing state machine. In lz decoder.c , it includes the outer decoding path and shared sliding-window dictionary. In lzma decoder.c , it includes six sup-porting LZMA1 functions and the structured state-machine implementation of the LZMA1 decoding core. The scope focuses on these decoder components and excludes the container/stream layer ( .xz parsing and integrity checks), the filter framework, the index/metadata machinery, and all encoders. Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 5        

> C source +
> CMake config
> immerse
> compiler wrapper
> CompCert ccomp clightgen -normalize
> Clight
> code.v files configured C executable feature probes per-file
> -D ,-I
> debug build
> Model Rocq definitions
> Spec
> VST funspecs Body proof scripts
> Rocq kernel checking human formalization agent reasoning human modeling human review human review proposed refinements Execution-grounded model tests (LLDB checkpoints) predicted states mismatches

Fig. 2. The model–specification–proof workflow and C-to-Clight ingestion path. Solid black arrows show artifact flow, gray arrows show build control, dashed arrows return refinements to human review, and the dotted loop connects configured executions to model validation. 

## 3 The Agent-Driven Pipeline 

Two requirements shape the pipeline: translation of build-configured C and hu-man control over contract meaning. 

3.1 Pipeline Overview 

Model and Spec name stages in our workflow rather than VST artifact classes. A functional Model gives executable Rocq definitions of a routine’s abstract state and transition. For example, the LZMA2 model represents the current framing phase, dictionary, and remaining input as Rocq values; lzma2 decode 

maps an initial state to a return code and successor state. A Spec then adds VST representation predicates that relate those values to C structs and buffers, and a standard VST funspec whose postcondition requires the C outcome to agree with the model. Proof agents then discharge the resulting body obligations by symbolic execution and entailment solving. Humans review and approve the models and funspecs; a proof failure may produce a proposed refinement, but it returns through the same review gate rather than being applied by the proving agent. The Rocq kernel checks the eventual proof term. This separation lets proof search proceed autonomously while contract changes remain subject to human review. Figure 2 shows build-aware Clight generation and model validation against executions, detailed in § 5.1 and § 5.2. Human ownership was organized by artifact: model, specification, and body-proof contributors reviewed changes to their respective stages against the C 6 P. Shlyakhtun et al. 

source and adjacent formal artifacts. The model keeps range decoding and sym-bol interpretation coupled because probability updates depend on the LZMA state and dictionary position across resumable calls. § 4 traces one proposed refinement through this path from agent report to reviewed, multi-site repair. 

3.2 Coordinating Large Proofs 

The cost of heavy proofs. The proofs in this development are unusually expen-sive to check. A single funspec proof can run to thousands of lines of forward symbolic execution, and elaborating one file can take hours and up to 20 GB of RAM. At that scale the naive loop of editing a file and re-running coqc is unworkable: every iteration pays the full cold-elaboration cost from the top of the file. Working efficiently under these constraints imposes four requirements that together shaped our tooling. First, iteration must be interactive , reusing the already-checked prefix of a file so that only the tail past an edit is re-elaborated. Second, the checking backend must stay alive, because every restart discards the warm cache and forces a cold re-elaboration; restarts must therefore be rare and narrowly scoped. Third, a backend that runs for a long time keeps using more and more memory, so it must be able to free memory without throwing that cache away. Fourth, a proof too large for one file or one agent’s context must be decomposable across files that share a compiled load path. A bare coqc loop provides none of these. Our Claude Code harness instead used the Model Con-text Protocol (MCP) [1] to drive rocq-lsp through rocq-mcp ; related MCP-style tooling appears in [22]. Runs used Claude Code 2.1.218, under a combination of a flat-rate subscription and metered API access, on one Ubuntu machine with 128 CPU cores and 1 TB of RAM, using Coq 8.20.1 6 and a project fork of VST with its bundled CompCert front end. 

MCP server. We began with LLM4Rocq’s rocq-mcp [13] (commit f9219c8 ), the only Rocq MCP server we found. It improved on a bare coqc command but lacked features these large proofs needed, so we forked it. The fork retains eight upstream tools but replaces the Petanque [5] interactive backend with a client that drives rocq-lsp [9] directly; Table 1 summarizes the resulting dif-ferences. In practice the proving agents leaned on four tools: rocq get state 

to inspect the goals at a position; rocq query to search the environment for lemmas and to check types and definitions; rocq step to run a tactic block 

speculatively at a position and see the resulting goals without modifying the file; and rocq compile lsp to check a file incrementally, optionally only up to a given position , so that an expensive or diverging proof further down never has to run before a lemma near the top can be confirmed. A completed check can also be marshaled to a .vof snapshot, rocq-lsp ’s serialization of the whole checked document, so a new session reloads the file’s warm cache in seconds instead of re-elaborating it from the top.                        

> 6Version 8.20.1 predates Rocq 9.0, the first release under the project’s new name, and therefore retains the name Coq .Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 7
> Table 1. Comparison of the two Rocq MCP servers. LLM4Rocq GenProof (ours) Interactive backend Petanque rocq-lsp Gym-like tactic exploration yes no Check up to a point no yes Save .vo /.vof from interactive session no yes Cache trim on high physical-memory use no yes Timeout keeps session warm no yes Per-sentence timing profiling no yes

Extracting and distributing goals. Working inside one giant semax body proof imposes three costs. Time: a helper lemma added near the top of the file is not seen by the main proof until the whole prefix between them is re-elaborated, so every iteration on it pays that full elaboration. Memory: while an agent works on one subgoal, Rocq still holds all the other goals of the proof in memory. Par-allelism: a single file is one editing frontier, so several agents cannot work on different parts of the proof at once. The natural fix would be to factor the proof into smaller lemmas, but VST is not built for that: its philosophy is that a func-tion is discharged by a single semax proof, and a goal arising mid-proof (carrying its full symbolic-execution context) has no convenient standalone statement to cut it at. To get the effect anyway, our rocq extract tool mechanically cuts a subgoal out of the live proof: at a chosen point it reads the goal off the running 

rocq-lsp session and writes two standalone files next to the source: the goal as a 

Definition , its hypotheses lifted into the statement under universal quantifiers so it closes into a self-contained term, and a Lemma skeleton whose initial proof state (after re-introducing those binders) is exactly the state at that point. Be-cause the printed goal is fully elaborated, with every VST notation expanded to its underlying term, the generated definition can exceed 100,000 lines; agents are told to treat it as opaque and work only against the Lemma skeleton. The subgoal is then proved in isolation in its own file, with its own warm cache, by its own agent, then wired back into the parent with a single eapply . To keep the de-tached copy honest, the extraction site is annotated with a confirm extraction 

marker that hashes the parent goal and detects later divergence. The marker is a development-only checkpoint: before a body is counted as closed it is replaced by an ordinary application of the proved lemma, so the final proof depends on neither the marker nor the extraction plugin, and Rocq checks the lemma application normally. 

Proving agent. A proving subagent is scoped to a single proof file and works on that file’s open admit s. It may edit only its assigned file and add proved helper lemmas, but may never change a definition, a theorem statement, or a funspec. It 

banks verified work behind explicit, provable admit s so the file always compiles, and validated progress is never reverted to restore a clean baseline. A session ends in one of three ways: the assigned goals are closed; substantial progress is 8 P. Shlyakhtun et al. 

banked and a forward-looking hand-off file is updated for the next invocation; or the goal is found unprovable as stated, in which case the agent works out why and reports one concrete contract fix: an exact diff, why it is unavoidable, and why it holds of the C code, without applying it, for human review through the gate in § 3.1. 

Orchestration. An orchestrator agent manages multi-file proving by spawning proving subagents. It frees a human from scheduling them and maintains a high-level view of the proof, since no single subagent holds it whole: a typical session produces a few hundred new tactics before exhausting its context window, so a large proof is closed over many hand-off-chained sessions. When a subagent stops, the orchestrator independently rechecks the file with rocq compile lsp 

(immediate, thanks to the shared warm cache) and commits validated progress. When a subagent reports a contract fix, the orchestrator drives it down the human-reviewed path ( § 3.1): it applies the change in a separate worktree, re-builds, spawns repair subagents for any proofs that break, and opens a merge request. 

Hooks. Agents occasionally break the intended workflow out of confusion, so we enforce the key rules mechanically with hooks : scripts the harness runs before or after a tool call to block it or attach a reminder. Three proved most useful. One denies reading or editing the ∼100k-line autogenerated goal files (which only burn context) while leaving the proof body editable. One keeps verification on the warm rocq-lsp path by blocking coqc and requiring an extra confirmation, with a reminder of the workflow, before make , so agents do not silently fall back to the slow, non-incremental check. One addresses a recurring misdiagnosis: agents sometimes treated a proof-checking timeout as a tooling failure and tried to route around it, so a reminder clarifies that the timeout is a real problem in the proof, which agents then fix, typically by replacing an over-broad automation tactic with a more targeted one. 

Guardrails. The Rocq kernel rechecks every accepted proof, and agents may neither alter trusted funspecs nor introduce admits or axioms into a closed body. We ran Print Assumptions over every reported body. 

3.3 Optimizing Proof-Checking Time 

As with human-written formal proofs, a first complete proof is often not the fastest to check, and at the volume our pipeline generates, proof time matters as much as proof existence: a tactic that is merely slow in a single hand proof becomes prohibitive once it runs across hundreds of goals and inside every agent retry loop. After closing the bodies, we used AI agents to reduce their check-ing time. Because the scope was the whole project, we relied on mechanical orchestration rather than a dedicated orchestrator agent: using the beads task tracker [10] we created one “optimize file X” task per file, and a scheduling script Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 9

repeatedly spawns an optimizing agent on each unblocked task; the agent pro-files its file, refactors it, and files follow-up tasks for further ideas, so the swarm manages itself. Most files optimized this way became at least 30% faster to check in wall-clock time. Guided by the per-sentence profiler, the agents concentrated on a few re-curring patterns. The most common was reshaping a goal before one of VST’s heavyweight solvers runs. The grouping of prop conjunctions that entailer! 

produces is unstable: adding one conjunct to a loop invariant can fold it into an unrelated group, and when an existentially quantified stage becomes concrete 

entailer! can discharge neighboring conjuncts eagerly. A script written against one goal shape can therefore fail after a small change. The repair is to inspect the post-entailer! goal and either script against the observed shape or use shape-insensitive discharge. Cold-cache time was the other trap: a tactic that is instantaneous against a warm rocq-lsp cache can exceed a 300-second sentence timeout cold, which an agent misdiagnoses as a logic failure; the worst offenders were entailer! /cancel over func ptr -laden sep contexts and full reductions over large composite environments. The countermeasures are targeted: move a handful of rewrites or reductions ahead of an entailer! or a cancel to leave the solver with almost nothing to do; extract a single pure fact with sep apply 

instead of a full entailer! ; and never simpl or vm compute a whole model function. Instead, unfold one step and rewrite under control. These changes re-peatedly reduced individual tactic calls from 40 s or more to under a second without changing what was proved. A second recurring optimization avoided pathological elaboration. Reading one field of a large nested-record representation drove VST’s solve load rule evaluation tactic, which computes the loaded value, to cbv -reduce the projec-tion through the entire record type on every forward , costing 40 s or more per field access. An agent rebound this tactic with Ltac ’s ::= mechanism, without modifying VST or the specification: for each affected field read the proof estab-lishes, once, a JMeq equality relating the projection to the loaded value, and the redefined tactic closes its goal from such an equality when one is present and otherwise delegates to the original tactic. Each affected forward then resolves in milliseconds instead of tens of seconds. 

## 4 A Reviewed Coupling Invariant 

We illustrate the reviewed agent–human interaction through one invariant repair in the LZMA2 framing decoder proof. The decoder processes a stream as a sequence of compressed or uncompressed chunks and may return when an input or output buffer is exhausted, then resume the same chunk on a later call. Its 

sequence field records the current phase: Control reads the next chunk’s control byte, Uncompressed1/2 and Compressed0/1 parse its size fields, Properties 

configures the embedded LZMA1 decoder, Lzma decodes a compressed payload, and Copy copies an uncompressed one. During a partially consumed header, 

next sequence records the phase that follows it. 10 P. Shlyakhtun et al. 

The VST proof establishes a loop invariant before the first iteration and re-establishes it after every continuation. The invariant describes the states that may occur at the loop head and relates the outer LZMA2 phase to the embedded LZMA1 child’s initialization stage. Our functional model records that stage with four constructors: NoChild before installation, Raw after installation, Sized after assigning its output size, and DecodeReady after reset makes it ready to decode. Treating the outer phase and child stage independently admits combinations that no execution of the C program can reach. The coupling clauses exclude those combinations and supply facts needed to verify the next branch or child-decoder call. The reviewed loop invariant asserts the following constraints; each is stated with the unreachable state it excludes. (a) A Raw child is never at Properties or Lzma ; once properties are available, its next header phase is Properties . This excludes using a merely allocated child as though its probability state had already been initialized. (b) A Sized child is never in the Lzma or Copy sequence. This excludes entering decoding or an uncompressed copy while the child is between its output-size assignment and the reset that makes it ready. (c) At Control , any child that is not DecodeReady still requires properties. This excludes a control state that advertises completed property setup while retaining an incompletely initialized child. (d) During normal header progression, next sequence is coupled to both the current header and the child stage: Copy follows only a compressed-size header with a non-Sized child; Properties follows an uncompressed header or a sufficiently initialized child; and Lzma requires DecodeReady . This ex-cludes stale pairings such as Sized /Copy . The clause is conditioned on prop-erties being available, so the immediate error return that deliberately leaves 

next sequence stale remains representable. 

A reported invariant gap. In the Compressed1 branch, a proving agent reached an obligation that required next sequence <> Copy when the child was Sized .The current invariant did not imply it: its Copy alternative carried no stage constraint and therefore admitted the Sized /Copy state. Following the frozen-specification rule, the agent stopped and reported (i) why the goal was not derivable, (ii) why the combination was nevertheless unreachable in the C code, and (iii) a candidate strengthening that it did not apply. The source argument was that Sized arises only on the compressed-chunk path, which sets the next phase to Lzma or Properties ; the uncompressed-copy path that sets Copy does not resize the child, which remains DecodeReady .The specification owner reviewed that reachability argument and approved the strengthened Copy clause in item (d). The change was not local: every pro-ducer of the invariant acquired a new obligation. In the next session, agents re-established the clause at nine producer sites and at its consumers; a final pass threaded the same fact through the uncompressed-copy branches and closed the framing body theorem. A condensed version of the report and the accepted clause appear in Appendix B. This episode follows the review path in Figure 2. We triage a stuck goal as proof work or a possible specification gap. Here the Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 11 

agent diagnosed a specification gap, and created a proposal for fixing it together with all affected proofs repaired; a human approved the strengthened invariant and proposed corrections. 

## 5 Proof Engineering for Production C and VST 

The C-to-proof path in Figure 2 required three engineering steps: recovering build-configured source, testing the functional model against executions, and regularizing unsupported C constructs. 

5.1 From Build-Configured C to Clight 

The pipeline begins with the project’s build configuration. Production C is mean-ingful only under the exact macros, include paths, and preprocessor flags its build system selects. Macro expansion itself is not the problem: clightgen invokes a preprocessor, and a compiler’s -E option can expose the expanded source. Neither mechanism discovers which definitions and include paths CMake assigns to each translation unit. Our immerse command runs CMake with a compiler wrapper. During configuration, CMake compiles small feature-probe programs to detect compiler and platform capabilities. The wrapper forwards these probes to ccomp ,CompCert’s compiler driver, allowing configuration to complete; during the gen-erated build, it replaces each compilation with clightgen -normalize , passing that command’s -D and -I options and writing the resulting Rocq file into a mir-rored output tree. Adding a source file to the intercepted build therefore brings it into Clight generation without a separately maintained list of definitions and include paths. 

5.2 Grounding the Model in Execution 

Execution grounding compares the functional model with concrete runs of the configured C program before the more expensive body proof. This matters for a resumable decoder: matching final output may not reveal an incorrect inter-mediate range-coder or dictionary state that affects a later call. Human review still determines model and contract meaning; the comparison provides comple-mentary evidence of discrepancies. We use LLDB ’s scripting API to place breakpoints at entry to and return from lzma decode and to inspect the buffer and struct states described by our 

data at assertions. 7 A Python handler reads the live buffers and structs and uses a mapping from their C layouts to our Rocq representations to lift each call’s inputs and observed outcome. Configurable buffer sizes force both complete calls and suspension followed by resumption. The snapshots pass through a JSONL trace into a generated Rocq module; a harness runs the functional model on the     

> 7The technique adapts LLDB ’s script-driven debugging tutorial, https://lldb.llv m.org/use/tutorials/script-driven-debugging.html .12 P. Shlyakhtun et al.

recorded inputs with vm compute and compares the model outcome with the recorded C outcome. This call-level differential test localizes a mismatch to a particular decoder call and transition. This process led to six corrective Git commits concerning probability-table offsets for literals and special distances, the dictionary position used to compute 

pos state , decoded-literal and repetition tracking, range-coder state threading through normalization on resumable paths, and stopping behavior at stream completion and the end-of-payload marker. The tests exposed these discrepancies before corresponding body-proof construction; the eventual semax body theorem supplies the formal connection between the C body and its funspec. 

5.3 C Standards Mismatches and Source Normalization 

Pointer arithmetic. The xz source deliberately uses index -1 for a probability-tree array:        

> 1// -1 is fine, because we start
> 2// decoding at probs[1], not probs[0].
> 3// NOTE: This violates the C standard,
> 4// since we are doing pointer
> 5// arithmetic past the beginning of
> 6// the array.
> 7assert((int32_t)(rep0 - symbol - 1) >= -1);

ISO C treats pointer arithmetic outside the same array object, except for the one-past element, as undefined behavior [11, 6.5.7]. CompCert , however, permits forming out-of-bounds pointers as long as they are not dereferenced or com-pared unsafely [21, Sec. 6.5.6]. In this case we left the C source unchanged. The VST proof uses the lower-level offset val form rather than field address ,

field address0 , or ArraySubsc , which describe in-bounds paths through the structure: 

> offset_val (sizeof tushort * offset) (field_address dt [StructField _pos_special] ptr)

Clight generation. We assigned explicit tags to anonymous structure definitions in the source and included headers processed by clightgen , giving the gener-ated composite types stable names without changing their layout or run-time behavior. We also added a translation-only harness that references the static-inline dictionary operations so that clightgen emits their bodies; the harness is not called by the decoder and is outside the verified call graph. 

Structure-copying assignment and goto . Structure assignment is permitted by ISO C when the left and right operands have compatible structure or union types [11, 6.5.17.2], and CompCert supports it. Verifiable C , however, excludes struct-copying assignments and goto statements [2, p. 9]. We therefore nor-malized the source. Aggregate assignments were expanded into fieldwise assign-ments: initialization copies use the macros GENPROOF LZMA LZ DECODER INIT and Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 13 

GENPROOF LZMA NEXT CODER INIT , while the local dictionary and range-decoder copies are expanded directly. For example:                           

> 1#define GENPROOF_LZMA_NEXT_CODER_INIT(value) \
> 2do { \
> 3lzma_next_coder *ptr = &(value); \
> 4ptr->coder = NULL; \
> 5ptr->init = (uintptr_t)(NULL); \
> 6ptr->id = LZMA_VLI_UNKNOWN; \
> 7ptr->code = NULL; \
> 8ptr->end = NULL; \
> 9ptr->get_progress = NULL; \
> 10 ptr->get_check = NULL; \
> 11 ptr->memconfig = NULL; \
> 12 ptr->update = NULL; \
> 13 ptr->set_out_limit = NULL; \
> 14 } while(0)

The goto in lzma decode jumped to the loop’s out section to save state before returning. It was replaced with a macro that performs the same state-save block and returns:                     

> 1#define GENPROOF_GOTO_OUT \
> 2/* [...] */ \
> 3dictptr->pos = dict.pos; \
> 4dictptr->full = dict.full; \
> 5/* [...] */ \
> 6coder->state = state; \
> 7coder->rep0 = rep0; \
> 8coder->rep1 = rep1; \
> 9coder->rep2 = rep2; \
> 10 coder->rep3 = rep3; \
> 11 return ret

Duff ’s device and unstructured switch . ISO C permits unstructured switch 

statements, including Duff’s device. CompCert rejects them by default, but its 

-funstructured-switch option accepts them through an optional front-end source transformation [21, pp. 31, 48–49]. That transformation introduces goto 

labels, so its result remains outside Verifiable C , which supports neither goto nor unstructured switch [2, p. 9]. The main loop of lzma decode is built around Duff’s device, so we instead replaced that control flow with explicit structured state-machine dispatch. These source changes made the program acceptable to Verifiable C .

## 6 Evaluation 

We evaluate three outcomes of the development: the source-level defect it ex-posed, the formal scope and scale of the proofs, and the resources used by the agentic workflow. 14 P. Shlyakhtun et al. 

6.1 Undefined Behavior 

The verification exposed undefined behavior (UB) in the raw LZMA1 zero-input path. After consuming its five-byte range-decoder prefix, raw LZMA1 decoding permits a zero-input call: lzma code accepts a null next in when avail in is zero. The rc to local macro then adds zero to the null in pointer.      

> 1#define rc_to_local(range_decoder, in_pos, fast_mode_in_required) \
> 2/* in is a null pointer; in_pos == 0 */ \
> 3const uint8_t *rc_in_ptr = in + (in_pos); \
> 4/* ... */

Similarly, rc from local subtracts two null pointer values when it evaluates 

rc in ptr - in . Both operations are UB under the C standard text used in this development [11, 6.5.7]. 

6.2 Verification Scope 

The reported decoder scope contains 22 closed body theorems for the decoder components, covering the LZMA2 framing state machine, outer decoding path, shared sliding-window dictionary, supporting LZMA1 functions, and the struc-tured state-machine implementation of the LZMA1 decoding core. Each theorem is proved against its function’s funspec. The target excludes the container/stream layer, filter framework, and all encoders. The range-decoder operations are inlined into lzma decode , so there are no separate range-decoder C bodies to list. The inlined operations are supported by five specification lemmas and a standalone well-formedness development; the latter is not imported into the reported body theorem. 

Closed-body inventory and scale. Table 2 enumerates 27 closed body theorems: 22 within the decoder scope and five supporting common-layer bodies. It reports function-level C, specification, and proof SLoC. Here “closed” records source status: each listed body theorem in the audited source snapshot was accepted through Qed with no uses of admit or Admitted . At the archived source snap-shot [20], the counted Rocq sources other than generated Clight ASTs total 1,187,329 lines: 1,042,399 code, 120,286 comments, and 24,644 blank; the gener-ated ASTs ( code.v ) add 164,102 code lines. The code lines divide into 775,768 in generated goal.v files stating extracted proof obligations ( § 3.2); 183,268 in lzma decode body.v and the 28 extracted ldb * proof.v files, plus 39,760 in helper libraries shared across those extracted proofs; 34,077 in the remaining body proofs and module glue; 5,314 in function specifications; 3,684 in functional models and the range-decoder well-formedness development; and 528 in shared infrastructure. The table attributes proof-file lines to individual functions. 

Proof-size accounting. Counting only the main lemma in lzma decode body.v 

and each of the 28 ldb * proof.v files gives 101,854 code lines; the correspond-ing C function has 338 lines. By comparison, the main lemma for the 98-line Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 15 

Table 2. Closed body proofs: function-level source lines of code. 

Name Spec Proof C Description 

Key functions 

lzma decode 76 183,268 338 Run LZMA1 decoder 

lzma2 decode 144 5,643 98 Run LZMA2 decoder 

Supporting (common layer) 

lzma alloc 34 113 13 Allocate memory 

lzma alloc zero 35 115 16 Allocate zero-filled memory 

lzma free 33 59 9 Free memory 

lzma bufcpy 96 392 18 Copy buffer 

lzma next filter init 42 227 9 Initialize next filter in a chain 

Init chain 

lzma lzma2 decoder init 323 189 8 Install LZMA2 as the terminal LZ filter 

lzma2 decoder init 148 3,698 23 Initialize LZMA2 decoder 

lzma lzma decoder create 117 202 17 Initialize LZMA1 decoder 

Dict 

dict get 16 209 7 Read byte at distance 

dict get0 12 43 5 Read the last byte 

dict is distance valid 14 60 5 Validate distance 

dict repeat 31 2,081 47 Repeat bytes 

dict put 16 473 7 Append byte 

dict put safe 19 115 8 Check available space and append byte 

dict write 55 2,811 13 Append bytes 

dict reset 11 15 6 Mark dict for reset 

LZ decoder 

lz decoder reset 45 88 10 Reset decoder 

decode buffer 56 2,917 39 Decode through the dictionary 

lz decode 67 204 45 Run LZ decoder 

LZMA1 decoder 

lzma decoder uncompressed 36 156 8 Pre-initialize decoder 

lzma decoder reset 37 3,516 56 Reset decoder 

lzma lzma lclppb decode 28 232 11 Unpack and validate properties 

literal init 46 148 9 Reset literal probabilities 

rc read init 75 615 15 Read the five-byte range-decoder prefix 

LZMA2 decoder 

lzma2 decoder end 45 415 9 Free decoder Each row specifies source lines of code without empty and comment-only lines: its funspec definition, attributed proof file or files, and C function body. For lzma decode , the proof figure sums 

lzma decode body.v and the 28 extracted ldb * proof.v files. Shared models and lemmas in other files, generated Clight ASTs ( code.v ), and generated goal-statement files ( goal.v ) are not counted in the table. 

lzma2 decode function needs only 4,590 lines. The functions contain 2,717 and 120 Clight statement nodes, respectively, yielding 37.5 and 38.3 proof lines per statement, a difference within 2%. The disparity arises before verification begins, in the C-to-Clight expansion (over eight statement nodes per source line against 1.2): after CompCert preprocessing, the two bodies span 1,934 and 110 nonblank lines of C, respectively. The verification-oriented C defines GENPROOF GOTO OUT , a macro that saves the local decoder state and returns when decoding suspends in the middle of a symbol. Preprocessing expands it 32 times, producing roughly 55 nodes per expansion and about 65% of the compiled body. Only 13 invocations occur directly in the source; the rest come through the rc * safe range-decoder primitives. For each expansion, the proof must establish the function’s full post-condition from a mid-symbol state. lzma2 decode stays small because it dele-gates LZMA1 decoding to a function with a VST specification. Its proof handles that call with one forward call , and its loop invariant groups related memory 16 P. Shlyakhtun et al. 

cells inside the lzma2 decoder stage rep and sliding window rep represen-tation predicates. The function suspends only at the top of its loop. Symbolic execution itself is a minor cost: only about 2% of the lines in the 28 extracted proofs are forward steps. Roughly 42% of the lines instead belong to blocks repeated verbatim across multiple proofs. The largest source of repetition is an 18-conjunct decoder-state well-formedness argument, written out 63 times to re-establish the loop invariant. The appendix records the counting method. 

Imported contracts and assumptions. The closed bodies consume imported con-tracts. In particular, the LZMA2 module imports allocator, dictionary, and supporting LZMA1 contracts. The outer module imports its child-decoder con-tracts, lzma bufcpy spec , and VST’s memcpy spec . A placeholder funspec ( lz decoder end placeholder spec ) remains in the outer module’s environment. The project-local assumptions are concentrated in the memory-allocation inter-face: the malloc and free body lemmas are declared as Rocq Parameter s, and an axiom ( mem mgr rep ) introduces the memory-manager predicate. These are the only project-local declarations of either kind in the proof sources. An audit file runs Print Assumptions on every reported body theorem; its output lists these declarations alongside the standard axioms imported with VST. 

6.3 Agentic Development Experience 

Project records report 1,595 agent sessions over the 70-day lzma decode devel-opment interval, using Claude Code 2.1.218 on the machine described in § 3.2. Execution-grounded model testing produced six corrective Git commits ( § 5.2), and one reviewed invariant repair was propagated to nine producer sites ( § 4). Finer-grained accounting of session outcomes, human review, active agent-hours, and service cost would require recovering and auditing interaction logs that were not available for this paper. These figures characterize scale and observed outcomes, not human effort or labor savings; no human-only baseline is available. 

6.4 Findings 

For the transformed verified-xz snapshot, the closed bodies establish Clight 

no-stuck safety, including memory safety, under their funspec preconditions and imported contracts. The lzma decode precondition excludes the raw zero-input call of § 6.1; applying the result to upstream liblzma additionally requires source equivalence. 

## 7 Related Work 

Verifying real C with VST. VST provides a foundational separation logic for C whose soundness is tied to the CompCert semantics, while VST-Floyd supplies the forward symbolic execution used in our body proofs [4,7]. It has previously Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 17 

been applied to cryptographic C, including OpenSSL HMAC [6] and SHA-256 [3]. We apply the same foundation to stateful, resumable decoder machinery, placing adaptive proof search in external agents and keeping model and contract changes under review. 

Agentic LLM experience reports for mechanized proof. Three recent reports apply AI agents to substantial Rocq developments. Paraskevopoulou [16] uses 

Claude Code to adapt an existing CPS proof technique to CertiCoq ’s ANF trans-formation, producing about 7,800 lines of kernel-checked Rocq in 96 hours un-der high-level human guidance. Wang [22] uses OpenAI Codex for supervised, checker-driven repair of CertiGC proofs invalidated by adding mutation. Fang and Xiong’s software project generation workflow [8] uses separate agents to turn requirements into a verified pure Rocq core, demonstrated by a generated RISC-V RV32I interpreter, then extracts it to C++/OCaml/Rust. Their obser-vation that explicit proof goals provide better repair signals than SMT timeouts echoes our VST experience ( § 3.2, § 5). The first two reports concern one deep proof development. We instead ver-ify multiple functions against human-approved models and specifications. Their workflow generates new code and leaves effects to an unverified host; we prove the effects of pre-existing, pointer-heavy C bodies against CompCert Clight se-mantics. 

## 8 Conclusion 

This development closed 22 semax body theorems for the listed decoder compo-nents. Under their funspec preconditions and imported contracts, they establish 

Clight safety, including memory safety, and model-relative partial functional cor-rectness; verification also exposed undefined behavior in the raw LZMA1 zero-input path ( § 6.1). Across 1,595 lzma decode sessions, agents constructed proofs and propa-gated human-approved revisions; humans retained authority over models and specifications, and Rocq checked the resulting terms. 

GenAI Assistance Disclaimer. LLM agents assisted proof construction ( § 3) and manuscript editing; the authors reviewed all text and retain responsibility for it. 

## References            

> 1. Anthropic: Model Context Protocol specification. https://modelcontextprotoc ol.io/ (2024) 2. Appel, A.W.: Verifiable C. https://vst.cs.princeton.edu/download/VC.pdf ,accessed July 22, 2026 3. Appel, A.W.: Verification of a cryptographic primitive: SHA-256. ACM Trans-actions on Programming Languages and Systems 37 (2), 7:1–7:31 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1145/2701415

18 P. Shlyakhtun et al. 4. Appel, A.W., Dockins, R., Hobor, A., Beringer, L., Dodds, J., Stewart, G., Blazy, S., Leroy, X.: Program Logics for Certified Compilers. Cambridge University Press (2014) 5. Arias, E.J.G., contributors: petanque : A low-latency interaction protocol for the Rocq prover. https://github.com/rocq-community/rocq-lsp/tree/main/petan que , accessed July 22, 2026 6. Beringer, L., Petcher, A., Ye, K.Q., Appel, A.W.: Verified correctness and security of OpenSSL HMAC. In: 24th USENIX Security Symposium. pp. 207–221 (2015) 7. Cao, Q., Beringer, L., Gruetter, S., Dodds, J., Appel, A.W.: VST-Floyd: A separa-tion logic tool to verify correctness of C programs. Journal of Automated Reasoning 

61 , 367–422 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-018-9457-5 8. Fang, J., Xiong, Y.: Trustworthy software project generation: A case study with an interactive theorem prover. arXiv:2605.26017 [cs.SE] (2026). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2605.26017 9. Gallego Arias, E.J., rocq-lsp contributors: Rocq-lsp: Visual studio code extension and language server protocol for Rocq. Version 0.2.5, https://github.com/ejgal lego/rocq-lsp (2025), gitHub repository. Accessed July 22, 2026 10. Gastown Hall: Beads: A distributed graph issue tracker for AI agents. https: //github.com/gastownhall/beads , accessed July 22, 2026 11. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG14: Programming Languages – C: Working draft N3220. 

https://www.open- std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n3220.pdf (2024), accessed July 22, 2026 12. Leroy, X.: Formal verification of a realistic compiler. Communications of the ACM 

52 (7), 107–115 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1145/1538788.1538814 13. LLM4Rocq: rocq-mcp : An MCP server for the Rocq prover. https://github.com /LLM4Rocq/rocq-mcp , main commit f9219c8 (April 30, 2026) 14. Miller, M.: Trends, challenges, and strategic shifts in the software vulnerability mitigation landscape. Presentation, BlueHat IL (2019), Presentation slides 15. MITRE: CVE-2024-3094: Malicious code in xz/liblzma. https://nvd.nist.gov /vuln/detail/CVE-2024-3094 (2024), backdoor inserted into the xz-utils build of 

liblzma 

16. Paraskevopoulou, Z.: Machine-generated, machine-checked proofs for averified compiler (experience report). arXiv:2602.20082 [cs.PL] (2026). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.20082 17. Pavlov, I.V.: Modifitsirovannyi algoritm Lempela-Ziva effektivnogo szhatiya in-formatsii s ispol’zovaniem statisticheskikh prognoziruyushchikh modelei [A mod-ified Lempel–Ziv algorithm for efficient data compression using statistical pre-dictive models]. Candidate of technical sciences dissertation, speciality 05.13.11, Ufa State Aviation Technical University, Ufa, Russia (2002), 114 pp., in Rus-sian. Russian State Library (RGB) call no. 61 02-5/2524-4. Record at disserCat: 

https://www.dissercat.com/content/modifitsirovannyi-algoritm-lempela -ziva-effektivnogo-szhatiya-informatsii-s-ispolzovaniem-st 

18. Reynolds, J.C.: Separation logic: A logic for shared mutable data structures. In: 17th IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS). pp. 55–74 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1109/LICS.2002.1029817 19. Rissanen, J., Langdon, G.G.: Arithmetic coding. IBM Journal of Research and Development 23 (2), 149–162 (1979). https://doi.org/10.1147/rd.232.0149 20. Shlyakhtun, P., Gryzlov, A., Kukharenko, V., Nesterov, V., Vasiliev, N., Ziborov, K., Zolotarev, E., Pokras, A.: Agent-driven verification of mem-ory safety for liblzma decoder components with VST. Zenodo (2026). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22166622, software artifact Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 19 21. The CompCert Development Team: The CompCert C compiler: User’s manual. 

https://compcert.org/man , accessed July 22, 2026 22. Wang, S.: AI-assisted completion of CertiGC proofs: An experience report. arXiv:2606.21167 [cs.PL] (2026). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2606.21167 23. Ziv, J., Lempel, A.: A universal algorithm for sequential data compres-sion. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 23 (3), 337–343 (1977). https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.1977.1055714 

## A The Proving-Subagent Prompt 

The prompt below is the actual template our orchestrator instantiated for every proving subagent it spawned; only the file name, goal list, handoff-file path, and per-run context vary. It enforces single-file scope: a subagent may edit exactly one proof file, so parallel agents cannot interfere and every change is attributable. Definitions, funspecs, and lemma statements remain immutable; when a goal is unprovable the agent must diagnose why and propose one concrete fix without applying it. This routes every spec change through the human review gate of § 3.1 (a worked example is traced in Appendix B). Completed proof steps are retained while unresolved goals remain explicit admit s, so the file always compiles, and a forward-looking handoff file carries state to the next session; the agent itself cannot commit, and the orchestrator independently recompiles before it does. 

You are a VST proving subagent for the liblzma-verification repo, spawned in the background. Read ‘docs/agent/proving-workflow.md‘ and follow it. Use the ‘rocq-mcp‘ server -- load its tools with ToolSearch "select:mcp__rocq-mcp__rocq_get_state,mcp__rocq-mcp__rocq_step,mcp__rocq-mcp__rocq_compile_lsp,mcp__rocq-mcp__rocq_query". You work ONLY on <FILE>. Goal(s) to push: <admit locations / what to prove>. FIRST, read <HANDOFF-FILE> if it exists -- it carries the current state, the planned next steps, and gotchas from the previous run. Keep it updated as you work. CONTEXT: <orient, don’t prescribe -- say what changed and what’s now available or unblocked, not which tactics to run. e.g. "the spec of lzma_decode now has 0 <= effective_size <= Int.modulus; the reach lemma’s precondition is now unblocked."> Reminders (full rules in proving-workflow.md): - Edit ONLY <FILE>. Never change a definition or a lemma STATEMENT (spec. v, 20 P. Shlyakhtun et al. 

> *_goal.v, a funspec). If a goal is unprovable, work out WHY and report ONE concrete fix -- do NOT apply it. - Helper lemmas are fine but must be PROVEN. - Bank verified work with explicit, provable admit.s; NEVER revert validated work. - You CANNOT commit. When you stop: rocq_compile_lsp the whole file ( expect errors:[] with any remaining admits) and update <HANDOFF-FILE> (forward -looking: state, next steps, gotchas -- no diary).

## B An Agent-Reported Specification Gap 

The report-only rule above produces a characteristic artifact. The agent must explain why the goal is not derivable from the current invariant, justify why the desired fact nonetheless holds of the C code, and leave a concrete fix for the owner to apply. The example below is condensed from the internal handoff log of the framing decoder body proof; it concerns the coupling invariant between the LZMA2 sequence machine and the embedded LZMA1 child decoder’s ini-tialization stage ( § 4). The proof was blocked in the Compressed1 case: with the child in stage Lzma1Sized and next sequence = Copy , the output state’s stage validity requires Copy <> Copy , which is unprovable. The agent’s report, lightly edited for notation: (a) Why it is not derivable. The coupling hypothesis with stage = Lzma1Sized 

only bounds the next sequence to {Copy , Properties }: the Lzma disjunct is excluded by discrimination, but the Copy disjunct of the coupling carries no stage constraint. No other loop-invariant conjunct relates next sequence 

to the child stage, so the invariant genuinely admits the state stage = Lzma1Sized ∧ next sequence = Copy .(b) Why it is true of the C code. A Sized child arises only from the compressed-chunk header path through lzma decoder uncompressed . Control bytes at least 0x80 set the next sequence to Lzma or Properties . Only control values 1 and 2 select Copy ; that uncompressed path does not touch the child, which remains DecodeReady from the previous chunk. Hence a Lzma1Sized stage rules out a Copy next sequence in every reachable state, but the invariant does not capture this fact. (c) The concrete fix (marked “do NOT apply without owner sign-off; spec is frozen”): strengthen the coupling’s Copy disjunct to carry a stage constraint, mirroring the Lzma disjunct, with the caveat (worked out in the report) that this is a multi-point strengthening (it obligates every producer of the post-condition), not a one-line edit. The fix the owner accepted is the strengthened disjunct the report asked for: Agent-Driven Verification of liblzma Decoder Components 21 

> (* coupling, Copy disjunct: 1 conjunct before, 3 after *)
> view next_sequence coder = Copy /\ stage <> Lzma1Sized /\ (view sequence coder = Compressed0 \/ view sequence coder = Compressed1)

The internal record dates the report to 2026-06-28 (session M), when it was accepted by the specification owner; the next session (N, same day) re-established the strengthened disjunct at nine producer sites and every consumer, closing the blocked case. The same invariant issue then occurred again on the uncompressed-copy-chunk paths and was reported and resolved with the same report-only pro-cess; the final strengthening was threaded in session O, which closed the framing body theorem with Qed . At no point did a proof agent edit the specification itself. 

## C Separation Lenses for Struct Footprints 

During development we used the paper-local term separation lens for a repre-sentation technique that regularized proofs over large structs. VST otherwise represents the decoder’s 29-field struct as one deeply nested spatial assertion, while most operations access only one or two fields. A separation lens consists of a per-field spatial predicate, a whole-struct predicate parameterized by the fields temporarily removed from it, and focus/unfocus lemmas: 

> Lemma rep_focus f absent cs p: set_mem f absent = false -> lzma1_decoder_rep absent cs p |-- field_rep cs p f * lzma1_decoder_rep (f :: absent) cs p. Lemma rep_unfocus f absent cs p: set_mem f absent = false -> field_rep cs p f * lzma1_decoder_rep (f :: absent) cs p |-- lzma1_decoder_rep absent cs p.

Here f selects a field, cs is the logical decoder state, p is the C struct pointer, and absent records fields already separated from the whole-struct pred-icate. rep focus extracts one field’s predicate while preserving the remainder; 

rep unfocus reverses that operation. A proof can therefore perform a local op-eration while keeping all other fields framed as a single predicate. This made evolving proof goals more regular and sped up intermediate versions of the de-velopment. The final proof does not depend on these lenses; we include them because they were used during development. 

## D Proof-Size Measurement Notes 

The proof-code counts reported in § 6 count the nonblank lines remaining af-ter comments are removed. Nested Rocq comments are handled correctly, and comment delimiters inside string literals are ignored. Main-lemma figures mea-sure from each Lemma declaration to its terminating Qed . The aggregate source inventory separately counts code, comment, and blank lines. 22 P. Shlyakhtun et al. 

To count macro-expanded C, we preprocess each translation unit with the same definitions and include paths used by clightgen , then use CompCert ’s parsed-C output to give the expanded code a stable layout. For each function, we count nonblank lines from its signature through its closing brace, excluding header contents. We validate the configuration by confirming that the regener-ated Clight statement counts match the artifact. For the main decoder comparison, Clight statement counts are constructor counts ( Sset , Sassign , Sifthenelse , Sloop , Sbreak , Scall , Sreturn , Sswitch )over the generated code.v abstract syntax trees. The macro-expansion count is cross-checked against this AST: f lzma decode contains 33 Sreturn nodes and exactly 32 assignments to each of state , rep0 through rep3 , probs , symbol ,

limit , offset , len , and uncompressed size . Each of the three saved range-coder fields has 64 assignments: one save and one conditional-reset assignment in each expansion. The symbolic-execution numerator is the number of forward sentences; di-viding it by the code-line count of the 28 extracted proofs gives 2%. The 42% repeated-block share uses exact block matching across their main lemmas after whitespace normalization. One dispatch case deserves a note. The Normalize case was proved across six extracted files totaling 16,957 main-lemma lines, against 10,071 for the byte-identical fall-through IsMatch case. The substantial extracted Normalize proofs use 3.53, 2.18, and 0.61 proof lines per Clight statement node, compared with 4.29 for IsMatch . For these per-goal ratios, statement counts use the four dom-inant constructors ( Sset , Sassign , Sifthenelse , and Sreturn ) in each gener-ated goal.v , rather than the whole function’s code.v . The extra lines have two sources. First, the proof case-splits on might finish without eopm , which is true when the expected uncompressed size is known and fits in the remain-ing output space. Both cases separately verify the same code after this test. Second, the extracted exit paths each re-establish the full postcondition. The six extracted Normalize proofs were developed first, while the loop invariants were still being settled; the 22 remaining extracted proofs were developed later against the settled invariants, each as a single goal.